<html>
 <head>
  <title>
   degob.org
  </title>
  <link href="degob.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
  <script language="JavaScript">
   <!-- Hide the script from old browsers --

	var current;

	function toc(toc_id) {

		toc_element = document.getElementById(toc_id);

		if ((toc_element.style.display=='none')||(toc_element.style.display=='')) {
			toc_element.style.display='block';
		}
		else {
			toc_element.style.display='none';
		}
	}


    // --end hiding here -->
  </script>
 </head>
 <body>
  <div id="wrapper">
   <div id="header">
   </div>
   <div id="main_wrapper">
    <div id="left_menu">
     <div id="left_menu_content">
      <a class="menu_main" href="?extsearch">
       Search
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php">
       Main page
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=203">
       On DEGOB
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2049">
       The Survivor Witnesses
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="?glossary">
       Glossary
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Encylopedia of Camps
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Supporters
      </a>
      <br/>
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="content_container">
     <div id="content">
      <div>
       <div style="float:left;display:inline">
        <h1 style="display:inline">
         Protocol Nr. 443
        </h1>
       </div>
       <a href="?showjk_img=443" style="text-decoration:none; color:#453c2d; ">
        <span style="vertical-align:middle; cursor:pointer; float:right; font-size:11px; width:126px; height:17px;  background-image:url('http://degob.hu/images/arrow_l.jpg'); background-repeat:no-repeat; color:#453c2d; font-weight:bold;">
         <span style="padding-left:30px;">
          scanned image
         </span>
        </span>
       </a>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both; margin-bottom:25px;">
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         A. J.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         female
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Beregszász
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1916
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Beregszász
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         seamstress
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Ghetto
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Beregszász
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Camps
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Auschwitz, Ravensbrück, Malhof
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         A. E.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         female
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Beregszász
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1917
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Beregszász
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         clerk
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Ghetto
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Beregszász
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Camps
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Auschwitz, Ravensbrück, Malhof
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         A. S.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         female
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Beregszász
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1922
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Beregszász
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         housewife
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Ghetto
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Beregszász
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Camps
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Auschwitz, Ravensbrück, Malhof
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         A. L.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         female
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Beregszász
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1928
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Beregszász
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         housewife
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Ghetto
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Beregszász
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Camps
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Auschwitz, Ravensbrück, Malhof
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
      </div>
      <br/>
      <br/>
      The persons in question have given us the following information:

At the beginning of last April, gendarmes came into our flat and ordered us to 
pack in half an hour because we would be taken to the ghetto. Right in our flat 
they undressed us and took away all our valuables. The anti-Jewish measures were 
issued by an official called Pál, who came to take a look at the ghetto several 
times, and did not find the implemented measures severe enough.

The Jewish Council was made up of the following members: Dávid Weisz, president 
of the religious community, Péter Reismann, Salamon Hirsch and N. Steinmetz, who 
did all they could to help the Jews. The Gestapo called these leaders to their 
office and threatened to kill all the Jews unless they paid a million peng?s - 
and not the Jews. They managed to collect a large sum with the greatest 
difficulties.

Accommodation in the ghetto was impossible, we were so much jammed in that one 
could hardly move. Our provisions were organised by the Jewish Council. The 
he beginning of last April, gendarmes came into our flat and ordered us to pack 
in half an hour because we would be taken to the ghetto. Right in our flat they 
undressed us and took away all our valuables. The anti-Jewish measures were 
issued by an official called Pál, who came to take a look at the ghetto several 
times, and did not find the implemented measures severe enough.

The Jewish Council was made up of the following members: Dávid Weisz, president 
of the religious community, Péter Reismann, Salamon Hirsch and N. Steinmetz, who 
did all they could to help the Jews. The Gestapo called these leaders to their 
office and threatened to kill all the Jews unless they paid a million peng?s - 
and not the Jews. They managed to collect a large sum with the greatest 
difficulties.

Accommodation in the ghetto was impossible, we were so much jammed in that one 
could hardly move. Our provisions were organised by the Jewish Council. The 
gendarmes did not let us give the children any milk and would continuously 
repeat that we would never be able to come back. Women of 12-25 and men up to 
the age of 60 had to work. Women carried bricks and did cleaning work, men 
pulled heavy iron carts. There was great severity at work. One day a gendarme 
captain arrived and ordered everybody to hand over their valuables otherwise we 
would be shot. Of course everybody tried to comply with the order.
 
We stayed in the ghetto for 3 weeks before we were entrained. 100-110 people 
were crammed in a closed freight car; we could neither sit nor stand. We 
travelled in the greatest heat and could not get any water. No one died in our 
transport, but I know for sure that many people died in later ones. 

We travelled for 3 days and 3 nights suffering horribly until we arrived in 
Auschwitz. Then came the usual selections, bathing, haircut and we got rags that 
they called clothes, in which we had no human form. In the baths, we marched 
naked in front of a line of SS soldiers. Our accommodation was in blocks, where 
1,300 people lived together. 13 of us had to sleep on one bunk, we were 
literally on top of each other, as there was no other way. We were kept in 
quarantine for 4 weeks, but since we were in a labour camp, one day the SS 
Blockführer came into the block, selected the sick ones, who were taken to the 
crematorium. I remember that a young woman was selected because she was fat, and 
she too was taken to the gas chamber to be burnt. Because we worked next to the 
walls of the crematorium, we saw these terrible things with our own eyes. We 
were 1,300, 1,000 of us were tattooed and 300 were moved into a separate block. 
This ### were weak and later ended up in the gas chamber. Mothers were usually 
separated from their children, if a mother would still go to her child, or child 
to mother, they were beaten up.

We worked at the Brezsinka, that is, in the baths, which was in the middle of 
five crematoria. Our job was to sort out clothes taken from the transports, and 
also those clothes that were brought out from the gas chambers. It often 
happened that among the clothes we found dead children who died in the gas 
chamber and were left among the clothes by accident.

The baths constantly smelled of dead people and we also saw how they were 
throwing the corpses into the fire. A friend of mine once got 25 blows with a 
rod from the head of the crematorium, an SS soldier, because she threw some 
bread over the wire into another camp for someone who was starving. As we found 
out later, they put bromide into the food, which made us so apathetic that we 
did not care about anything. This, by the way, was our luck, otherwise we would 
have gone mad because of the horrible things we saw day after day in the middle 
of that fiery hell and torture. I myself, like everybody else who worked in the 
bath, became a nervous wreck. We, who worked in the bath, were certainly 
sentenced to death so that no witness of these dreadful horrors remained alive. 
I forgot to mention that in the heaviest rain and cold we would often see 
lorries surrounded by SS soldiers, in which naked women were taken to the 
crematorium alive.

We worked for 10 months at the Brezsinka, when finally we got to the weaving 
mill. They always hurried us at work, we had only a fifteen-minute lunch break 
and we had to eat standing during the "Zählappell." We could not drink water 
during the day because it was locked up, so we suffered terribly not only from 
hunger but also from thirst. We could change our underwear once in 4 weeks, thus 
everybody was dirty and full of lice. We were given no soap at all.

We worked for 4 weeks in the weaving mill before I got into an Aussenkommando. 
We worked at construction of an SS hospital. We carried bricks, we had to run 
with very heavy stones, both the SS soldiers and the German Aryan capos always 
hurried us at work.

From Auschwitz we went to Ravensbrück. Before we started out, there were very 
frequent selections, the chimneys of the crematorium were smoking day and night. 
Since I had swelling under my arm I was also almost selected, but finally I 
managed to slip into a transport.

In Ravensbrück they put us up in a huge tent, where we stayed for 3 days. We lay 
on the bare ground, on the asphalt, in the greatest cold without blankets. We 
had no water, so in our agony we drank the rainwater that was dripping from the 
roof. Later, we were disinfected and put into blocks, where the block leader was 
a Polish Aryan woman, who treated us very badly: she kept beating us. She beat 
up a friend of mine so badly that she went to hospital, and she knocked out the 
eye of another without any reason, just because we were Jewish, as she herself 
would often say. Two weeks later there were selections, and whoever had the 
smallest rash on her body was made to stand aside. We do not know what happened 
to them. The rest of us, 1,000 people, were taken to a labour camp in Nalhof, 
where we worked in an ammunition factory. The Kommandoführer treated us very 
badly. We worked 12 hours a day, and it often happened that the Lagerführer, 
simply because we were talking, made us stand in the open during a night after 
work #########. Once she cracked the head of a friend of mine because she was 
talking a little too loudly during lunch. We were very hungry because they 
hardly gave us a little bread and soup that consisted of 3/4 litre of water and 
turnips. ##potato peel they cooked the potato for the SS soldiers, they gave 
us##

Many people went to hospital because they were too weak; sick people were taken 
to hospital but there was no medicine.

When Russian troops were approaching, they made us leave on foot. We did not eat 
anything the whole day. Next day, we got some cans without bread. Although 
American packages were sent to us, SS soldiers kept these for themselves. Many 
people who could not keep up fell behind during the journey, we do not know what 
happened to them. As we were marching all of a sudden we realised that the SS 
women took off their clothes and put on prisoner clothes. When we reached a 
forest, the SS left us. Later they returned because they were ordered to take us 
further. We had to walk on. One night we had a rest in a village and next day, 
that is, on the 2nd of May this year, our saviours, the glorious Russian troops 
arrived and liberated us from our horrible sufferings. We came here through 
Bohemia with their help. As for our future plans, we would like to emigrate to 
Palestine or America as soon as possible.
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="right_menu">
     <div id="right_menu_content">
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main_hu" href="index.php?showarticle=2031">
        The Holocaust in Hungary
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_1')">
        Perpetrators
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_1">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2011">
          The Gendarmerie
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2012">
          The Police
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2013">
          The Public Administration
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_2')">
        The Gentile Population
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_2">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2014">
          Indifference, Antipathy, Antisemitism
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2015">
          Hungarian Rescuers
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_12')">
        Regions of Destruction
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_12">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2016">
          The Capital: Budapest
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2033">
          A City in the Countryside: Balassagyarmat
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2034">
          A Village: Rákosszentmihály
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_4')">
        Women
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_4">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2017">
          Hungarian Jewish Women in the Kanadakommando
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2018">
          SS Female Overseers in Auschwitz
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2019">
        The First Massacre
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2020">
        Antisemitism
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2021">
        The Jewish Council
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2022">
        Resistance, Zionists
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_9')">
        Death Factory - Auschwitz-Birkenau 1944
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_9">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2023">
          Prisoners' Fate in Auschwitz-Birkenau
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2024">
          SS physicians
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2025">
          What did the Victims know?
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_10')">
        Rescue
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_10">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2026">
          Decent Gendarmes
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2027">
          Policemen
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2028">
          Humane Officials
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2029">
          The Military
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2030">
        Looting
       </a>
      </div>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2032">
       Labour Service
      </a>
      <script>
       toc('menu_12');toc('menu_12');
				if (current!=null) toc(current);
      </script>
     </div>
    </div>
   </div>
   <div id="footer">
   </div>
   <a href="http://degob.hu/index.php" style="text-decoration:none;" title="magyar">
    <div id="switch_banner" title="switch to Hungarian">
     váltás magyarra
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="bphm_banner">
    <a href="http://bphm.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="bphm.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/BPHM_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#1d3c51;font-size:9px;">
      bphm.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <div id="holomo_banner">
    <a href="http://www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/holo_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#5b4b32;font-size:9px;">
      holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <a href="index.php">
    <div id="home">
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="scroller">
    <object align="middle" classid="clsid:d27cdb6e-ae6d-11cf-96b8-444553540000" codebase="http://fpdownload.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=8,0,0,0" height="18" id="scroller" width="927">
     <param name="allowScriptAccess" value="sameDomain"/>
     <param name="movie" value="scroller_en.swf"/>
     <param name="quality" value="high"/>
     <param name="wmode" value="transparent"/>
     <param name="bgcolor" value="#000000"/>
     <embed align="middle" allowscriptaccess="sameDomain" bgcolor="#000000" height="18" name="scroller" pluginspage="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" quality="high" src="scroller_en.swf" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="927" wmode="transparent"/>
    </object>
   </div>
  </div>
  <script src="http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js" type="text/javascript">
  </script>
  <script type="text/javascript">
   _uacct = "UA-316143-2";
urchinTracker();
  </script>
 </body>
</html>
