<html>
 <head>
  <title>
   degob.org
  </title>
  <link href="degob.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
  <script language="JavaScript">
   <!-- Hide the script from old browsers --

	var current;

	function toc(toc_id) {

		toc_element = document.getElementById(toc_id);

		if ((toc_element.style.display=='none')||(toc_element.style.display=='')) {
			toc_element.style.display='block';
		}
		else {
			toc_element.style.display='none';
		}
	}


    // --end hiding here -->
  </script>
 </head>
 <body>
  <div id="wrapper">
   <div id="header">
   </div>
   <div id="main_wrapper">
    <div id="left_menu">
     <div id="left_menu_content">
      <a class="menu_main" href="?extsearch">
       Search
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php">
       Main page
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=203">
       On DEGOB
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2049">
       The Survivor Witnesses
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="?glossary">
       Glossary
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Encylopedia of Camps
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Supporters
      </a>
      <br/>
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="content_container">
     <div id="content">
      <div>
       <div style="float:left;display:inline">
        <h1 style="display:inline">
         Protocol Nr. 1743
        </h1>
       </div>
       <a href="?showjk_img=1743" style="text-decoration:none; color:#453c2d; ">
        <span style="vertical-align:middle; cursor:pointer; float:right; font-size:11px; width:126px; height:17px;  background-image:url('http://degob.hu/images/arrow_l.jpg'); background-repeat:no-repeat; color:#453c2d; font-weight:bold;">
         <span style="padding-left:30px;">
          scanned image
         </span>
        </span>
       </a>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both; margin-bottom:25px;">
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         K. M.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         female
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Nagyberezna
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1922
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Ungvár
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         teacher
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Ghetto
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Ungvár
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Camps
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Auschwitz, Weisswasser, Horneburg, Bergen - Belsen
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         H. J.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         female
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Nagyberezna
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1913
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Ungvár
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         milliner
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Ghetto
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Ungvár
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Camps
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Auschwitz, Weisswasser, Horneburg, Bergen - Belsen
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
      </div>
      <br/>
      <br/>
      The persons named above have given us the following information:

In the spring of 1944, after Germans invaded the country, the Jewry of the town 
had to collect a payoff of a million of peng?. The members of the Jewish Council 
- Dr Elek László, Jen? Rottman, Dr Miklós, etc.  all tried to support us 


In the spring of 1944, after Germans invaded the country, the Jewry of the town 
had to collect a payoff of a million of peng?. The members of the Jewish Council 
- Dr Elek László, Jen? Rottman, Dr Miklós, etc.  all tried to support us 
representing the interest of Jews. We had no complaints about their activity 
although they could not achieve much. House searches were frequent. If women 
were concerned a midwife searched them, and they seized almost all our 
belongings during these searches. 
      
They rounded up around 10,000 people into the ghetto of the brick factory of 
Ungvár, which was opened the 27th of April. The Mayor of the time Dr Megay was 
an ill-famed antisemite who declared that he wanted to see the town clean, that 
is, without any Jew, and affirmed that he would do anything to achieve it, and 
to avoid that even a single Jew could return. They took men out of the ghetto 
for work while policemen kicked them and beat them. They arrested even those 
Christians who tried to send some food into the ghetto. They made richer Jews 
appear in police headquarters every day and tortured them in different ways to 
learn where they had hidden their valuables. Several of them died of these 
interrogations, like Izidor Friedmann. They also beat a person of communist 
sentiments called Fehér till he died. At the end of May, placards let us know 
which transport would depart when. We left in the fourths transport. We were 
searched in the car before departure when they grabbed our gold, money, and 
valuable objects. 80 of us were put in a car; we got some water at start, while 
the Jewish Council provided buckets for the toilet. They opened the freight cars 
only once when Germans seized the rest of our valuables. No one died in our car 
and I cannot remember if anyone tried to escape. Authorities completely 
misinformed us because they claimed we would do agricultural work on the estates 
of the some count (they also told us the name of the count but we forgot it) and 
we even heard that they had the address written on some luggage so that people 
did not need to carry them but they promised to send the luggage to them.

The first of June, on the third night of travel we arrived in Auschwitz but the 
cars were opened only in the morning, when Polish prisoners in striped clothes 
came up in car and ordered us to leave our luggage on train, they claimed they 
would carry them later to our place, and made us get off. When we were off, we 
had to queue up on two sides, women and men were separated, but it happened so 
fast that by the time we looked around we saw that our relatives were not any 
more with us. We could not even say goodbye. They took us into the baths, cut 
the hair off, gave us rags instead of clothes, and led us into Camp C, into 
block 23, were there were 1,200 of us, while 14-15 people lay on a berth. All 
day long we stayed cowered on the floor. Rain fell through the roof and we could 
not sleep during the night. It appeared to us that people were crying and 
screaming outside. When we went out, we saw fire. There were huge flames day and 
night. At 3 am we would wake up to roll call, the sky was still full of stars. 
When we were led out of the block we washed ourselves if there was water but 
everything had to happen in seconds. Everyone had to stand erect till an SS-man 
or woman appeared to count us. We were altogether 30,000 people in camp C, if 
they counted another number (and it rarely happened that they counted the right 
number) we had to stay on the knees in dirt and mud till they found out where 
they made a mistake, so the roll call in the morning lasted for 4-5 hours but 
sometimes even longer. In Auschwitz we did not need to work, which was worse: we 
were just going around idle all day long since we could not stay in the block. 
We got bitter coffee or tea in the morning, lunch was a kind of dense soup 
prepared tasteless without salt, full of pebbles. Five of us ate of the same 
pot, but often there were even ten of us for a pot. We got bread and some zulag 
at the roll call of the evening.

Later, they selected us into transports and temporarily moved us into Camp B. It 
appeared that more intelligent, learned women, women doctors, etc. were lodged 
here. There were no berths in this camp; we had to lie on the floor. After the 
roll call of the evening we quickly sneaked back into the block to find a place 
for lying down. Otherwise it could happen that there was no room left for lying 
down. Food was similar as in Camp C. There was an infirmary here where they 
brought the severely sick even from Camp C  and also the dead. Around the 
evening a truck parked in front of the infirmary. They threw the corpses on it, 
together with the sick but even those who appeared to be weak. All were nude. We 
did not believe the stories about the crematorium until we saw that the truck 
left in the direction of the crematorium. We realised only now that it was not a 
tale, that it existed also in reality, and thereafter we could not sleep for 
days. Aforementioned Margit Krischer noticed one of her relatives from Ungvár, 
who had been also in Camp C and was now in the infirmary of Camp B. She also 
recognised me as I looked through the window. We started talking. There were 
sick and dead people together in the same small room. In the evening, I saw that 
the truck took her away, too. 

When selections became very frequent in September, we were selected for a 
transport of labourers. We were very happy about it. They transported us into 
Weisswasser. The journey lasted three days and they gave us sufficient bread and 
pâté. There were 50 of us in a car. After the weeks in Auschwitz we arrived in 
Weisswasser in a very poor condition. Here we got clean clothes, had a bath, and 
were accommodated 100 of us in a block, 16 of us in each room, and everyone had 
a bed on her own. It was a celestial feeling, and this feeling was bolstered by 
better food. We could have complained only about its quantity. We worked for a 
factory producing radio parts, now it produced war articles, in 12 hours a day. 
Treatment at work did not give cause for complaints either. SS-women guarded us 
strictly, if they caught someone at fishing for a potato in a bin to alleviate 
her hunger her hair was cut off. For any minor misbehaviour we had to report in 
front of SS leaders who would then beat us up.

In the middle of February, we got into a transport and were taken to Horneburg, 
as the camp in Weisswasser was emptied because of Russian approach. We set off 
on foot and marched for a week. We received a loaf of bread and a little zulag 
for the whole trip. On the way 11 women ran away but were unfortunately 
captured. The Kommandoführer had them taken away in order to got them shot but 
as he received no written order they got away with it. Accommodation in 
Horneburg was similar to the one in Weisswasser and the work was the same. We 
stayed here till the first of April, when they transported us into the 
concentration camp of Bergen-Belsen.

We could have made this journey in two days, however, the train stood still for 
long periods of time since there was no connection; hence we travelled for four 
days and ran out of food. When we got to Bergen-Belsen we immediately realised 
in what a dreadful place we arrived, where people were walking around dizzy 
because of hunger. They put us into a block and three days passed before we got 
something to eat but it was only some watery turnip soup. Comrades of the camp 
told us that they had not seen bread for three weeks. In front of the blocks 
there were cadavers lying around, while a bit further there were piles of dead 
bodies. These corpses must have been lying there already for 4-5 months. We also 
saw Jewish prisoners carrying away the corpses; they were themselves half-dead 
as well. They were dragging these skeletons on the floor with a rope hooked on 
the neck. Luckily, we did not stay here for long, as we had the feeling we would 
have died of lice and squalor in a few days time.

Aforementioned Margit Krischer: I was a member of the water-kommando, as a 
result, my lunch was secured. Once when there was a queue for lunch I saw an SS-
man targeting his weapon at me, I jumped back fast and survived. I was not 
allowed to go for water. If the SS caught you at it you were dead.

When finally we noticed English cars on the 15th of April, there was a 
blokksperre (a curfew), that is, we were not allowed to leave the blocks till 
the Germans were there. Some of us went out to watch how the English arrived. 
When the SS noticed it they shot at them. As we heard these were SS-men talking 
Hungarian. One of the girls died.

After the liberation we got disinfected and were accommodated in an SS barrack. 
Everyone in the camp lay in bed with typhus - including us. We came home to 
Budapest the 5th of July, crossing Prague and Pozsony.

Future plans: We would like to emigrate to Palestine.
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="right_menu">
     <div id="right_menu_content">
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main_hu" href="index.php?showarticle=2031">
        The Holocaust in Hungary
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_1')">
        Perpetrators
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_1">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2011">
          The Gendarmerie
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2012">
          The Police
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2013">
          The Public Administration
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_2')">
        The Gentile Population
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_2">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2014">
          Indifference, Antipathy, Antisemitism
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2015">
          Hungarian Rescuers
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_12')">
        Regions of Destruction
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_12">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2016">
          The Capital: Budapest
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2033">
          A City in the Countryside: Balassagyarmat
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2034">
          A Village: Rákosszentmihály
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_4')">
        Women
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_4">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2017">
          Hungarian Jewish Women in the Kanadakommando
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2018">
          SS Female Overseers in Auschwitz
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2019">
        The First Massacre
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2020">
        Antisemitism
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2021">
        The Jewish Council
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2022">
        Resistance, Zionists
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_9')">
        Death Factory - Auschwitz-Birkenau 1944
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_9">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2023">
          Prisoners' Fate in Auschwitz-Birkenau
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2024">
          SS physicians
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2025">
          What did the Victims know?
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_10')">
        Rescue
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_10">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2026">
          Decent Gendarmes
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2027">
          Policemen
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2028">
          Humane Officials
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2029">
          The Military
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2030">
        Looting
       </a>
      </div>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2032">
       Labour Service
      </a>
      <script>
       toc('menu_12');toc('menu_12');
				if (current!=null) toc(current);
      </script>
     </div>
    </div>
   </div>
   <div id="footer">
   </div>
   <a href="http://degob.hu/index.php" style="text-decoration:none;" title="magyar">
    <div id="switch_banner" title="switch to Hungarian">
     váltás magyarra
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="bphm_banner">
    <a href="http://bphm.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="bphm.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/BPHM_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#1d3c51;font-size:9px;">
      bphm.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <div id="holomo_banner">
    <a href="http://www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/holo_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#5b4b32;font-size:9px;">
      holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <a href="index.php">
    <div id="home">
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="scroller">
    <object align="middle" classid="clsid:d27cdb6e-ae6d-11cf-96b8-444553540000" codebase="http://fpdownload.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=8,0,0,0" height="18" id="scroller" width="927">
     <param name="allowScriptAccess" value="sameDomain"/>
     <param name="movie" value="scroller_en.swf"/>
     <param name="quality" value="high"/>
     <param name="wmode" value="transparent"/>
     <param name="bgcolor" value="#000000"/>
     <embed align="middle" allowscriptaccess="sameDomain" bgcolor="#000000" height="18" name="scroller" pluginspage="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" quality="high" src="scroller_en.swf" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="927" wmode="transparent"/>
    </object>
   </div>
  </div>
  <script src="http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js" type="text/javascript">
  </script>
  <script type="text/javascript">
   _uacct = "UA-316143-2";
urchinTracker();
  </script>
 </body>
</html>
