<html>
 <head>
  <title>
   degob.org
  </title>
  <link href="degob.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
  <script language="JavaScript">
   <!-- Hide the script from old browsers --

	var current;

	function toc(toc_id) {

		toc_element = document.getElementById(toc_id);

		if ((toc_element.style.display=='none')||(toc_element.style.display=='')) {
			toc_element.style.display='block';
		}
		else {
			toc_element.style.display='none';
		}
	}


    // --end hiding here -->
  </script>
 </head>
 <body>
  <div id="wrapper">
   <div id="header">
   </div>
   <div id="main_wrapper">
    <div id="left_menu">
     <div id="left_menu_content">
      <a class="menu_main" href="?extsearch">
       Search
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php">
       Main page
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=203">
       On DEGOB
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2049">
       The Survivor Witnesses
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="?glossary">
       Glossary
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Encylopedia of Camps
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Supporters
      </a>
      <br/>
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="content_container">
     <div id="content">
      <div>
       <div style="float:left;display:inline">
        <h1 style="display:inline">
         Protocol Nr. 468
        </h1>
       </div>
       <a href="?showjk_img=468" style="text-decoration:none; color:#453c2d; ">
        <span style="vertical-align:middle; cursor:pointer; float:right; font-size:11px; width:126px; height:17px;  background-image:url('http://degob.hu/images/arrow_l.jpg'); background-repeat:no-repeat; color:#453c2d; font-weight:bold;">
         <span style="padding-left:30px;">
          scanned image
         </span>
        </span>
       </a>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both; margin-bottom:25px;">
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         I. M.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         female
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Oroszvég
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1918
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         photographer
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Ghetto
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Munkácsi téglagyár
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Camps
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Auschwitz, Ravensbrück, Neustadt, Gléve
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         I. M.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         female
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Oroszvég
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1919
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         housewife
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Ghetto
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Munkácsi téglagyár
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Camps
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Auschwitz, Ravensbrück, Neustadt, Gléve
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
      </div>
      <br/>
      <br/>
      The persons in question have given us the following information:

We were in the Munkács brick factory ghetto, where we were entrained to leave 
for Auschwitz. When we arrived, we went through the usual selections, bath, 
haircut, etc. We did not work for 4 days, and then we were tattooed on the left 
arm and they recorded our data on card files. Soon afterwards we were assigned 
work in the baths, that is, in the so-called Brezsinka. We sorted out the 
clothes taken from the transports. Treatment was quite cruel, but we could not 
complain about rations. We got enough bread and soup every day.

We worked in the baths for 8 months. We saw terrible things day after day, 
because we were just opposite the crematorium. We saw as they were taking tens 
of thousands of young mothers with their children and old people to the gas 
chamber and burnt them every day. The chimney of the crematorium was emitting 
flames day and night. If someone resisted, they ordered huge dogs to attack 
them. Sometimes they took those people selected for transports also into the 
crematorium. We realised it because when we were sorting out clothes we found 
camp-bread in the pockets of dresses and coats, and also numbers on the coats 
(because we had to wear numbers on the outside of clothes or coats). I also know 
that some people managed to escape from the crematorium, but only very few.

Those men who worked in the crematoria were replaced every three months. They 
were then taken to a clothes storage where they were gassed. These were members 
of the so-called Sonderkommando. They were not allowed to talk to anybody, SS 
soldiers guarded them even when they went to wash themselves so that they could 
not talk to us. Before they were executed, they were all singing the Russian 
national anthem. It would still happen that I could talk to a person like that 
sentenced to death before he was killed with gas. I remember that one of them 
shouted to us in the baths the following words: we burnt 15,000 people today, 
unfortunately we will not have an opportunity to take revenge for all these 
horrible things, but you may stay alive and we ask you to take revenge for all 
this horror... Another time one of my friends managed to save two children, she 
snatched them from a transport that was on the way to the crematorium. They cut 
her hair as punishment, but she managed to keep the children alive. 

When we arrived in Birkenau it was night and we saw the great flames soaring 
into the sky behind the crematorium. The road to the baths led that way and we 
witnessed as the members of the Sonderkommando were throwing corpses into huge 
pits. One held the arms and another one the legs. We found out later that they 
had done this because there had been no room in the crematorium, and they had to 
get rid of the corpses this way. 

The crematorium was smoking until about the end of October, then the Germans 
demolished it, and left only one standing. When the Russian troops were 
approaching us we were evacuated, but before we left, they took blood from us 
for their soldiers. Only sick and weak people were left behind in the camp. 

We walked 3 days and 3 nights towards Ravensbrück. We had no food for the 
journey; whoever fell behind was shot by the SS men. Many people died from 
exhaustion, because of hunger. 3 days later, we were entrained and we continued 
our journey by train. There were 90-100 people in an open cattle wagon in the 
coldest winter, most of them without coats or shoes. Many people died in the 
wagon, most of them froze to death, and there were some who went mad. 

We arrived in Ravensbrück at night and we were standing outside in the cold and 
snowy night until the morning. We were not allowed to enter the block even the 
next day, but we had to stay outside in the open, in the greatest snowstorm. We 
were so distressed that we ate the snow, because they gave us no food at all. 
Finally after two days we were taken into a wooden block, where there was water 
up to our knees. We slept on bunks, all the time in water. Everything was 
horribly dirty and also full of lice. They would beat us all the time for no 
reason, mostly our heads. We queued for a day until we got a little bread and 
margarine. There was no water, so we were all full of lice and worms.

Three months later, I finally got away from this awful place, we travelled by a 
passenger train to Neustadt-Gleve. When we arrived, they put us up in a huge 
warehouse, where 4,000 of us were crammed together so that we were lying all 
over each other, there was no place to move. The Aufseherins and the SS soldiers 
were beating us for no reason. We hardly got a slice of bread and 2 decilitres 
of empty soup a day. There were many weak people here as well. Our work was to 
dig trenches, while they would beat us all the time.

Early in the morning we had to line up for a roll call, which lasted for two 
hours, even if it rained there was no mercy. If someone did not stand erect or 
talked to someone else, they made them kneel for hours in water and snow. People 
were completely worn-out, their legs and arms were swollen with hunger. Hundreds 
of people died from hunger every day.

On the 1st of May this year, we suddenly heard shots, and our saviours arrived 
that very night, the glorious American troops, who provided us the most 
delicious canned food, gave us clean clothes and the best provisions. We arrived 
here through Bohemia with the help of the Americans. I forgot to mention that 
when the Americans arrived to the camp, the SS people all tried to escape, but 
they were captured and immediately entrained.

As for my future plans, I would very much like to emigrate to Palestine as soon 
as possible.
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="right_menu">
     <div id="right_menu_content">
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main_hu" href="index.php?showarticle=2031">
        The Holocaust in Hungary
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_1')">
        Perpetrators
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_1">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2011">
          The Gendarmerie
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2012">
          The Police
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2013">
          The Public Administration
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_2')">
        The Gentile Population
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_2">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2014">
          Indifference, Antipathy, Antisemitism
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2015">
          Hungarian Rescuers
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_12')">
        Regions of Destruction
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_12">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2016">
          The Capital: Budapest
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2033">
          A City in the Countryside: Balassagyarmat
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2034">
          A Village: Rákosszentmihály
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_4')">
        Women
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_4">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2017">
          Hungarian Jewish Women in the Kanadakommando
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2018">
          SS Female Overseers in Auschwitz
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2019">
        The First Massacre
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2020">
        Antisemitism
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2021">
        The Jewish Council
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2022">
        Resistance, Zionists
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_9')">
        Death Factory - Auschwitz-Birkenau 1944
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_9">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2023">
          Prisoners' Fate in Auschwitz-Birkenau
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2024">
          SS physicians
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2025">
          What did the Victims know?
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_10')">
        Rescue
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_10">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2026">
          Decent Gendarmes
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2027">
          Policemen
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2028">
          Humane Officials
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2029">
          The Military
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2030">
        Looting
       </a>
      </div>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2032">
       Labour Service
      </a>
      <script>
       toc('menu_12');toc('menu_12');
				if (current!=null) toc(current);
      </script>
     </div>
    </div>
   </div>
   <div id="footer">
   </div>
   <a href="http://degob.hu/index.php" style="text-decoration:none;" title="magyar">
    <div id="switch_banner" title="switch to Hungarian">
     váltás magyarra
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="bphm_banner">
    <a href="http://bphm.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="bphm.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/BPHM_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#1d3c51;font-size:9px;">
      bphm.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <div id="holomo_banner">
    <a href="http://www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/holo_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#5b4b32;font-size:9px;">
      holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <a href="index.php">
    <div id="home">
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="scroller">
    <object align="middle" classid="clsid:d27cdb6e-ae6d-11cf-96b8-444553540000" codebase="http://fpdownload.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=8,0,0,0" height="18" id="scroller" width="927">
     <param name="allowScriptAccess" value="sameDomain"/>
     <param name="movie" value="scroller_en.swf"/>
     <param name="quality" value="high"/>
     <param name="wmode" value="transparent"/>
     <param name="bgcolor" value="#000000"/>
     <embed align="middle" allowscriptaccess="sameDomain" bgcolor="#000000" height="18" name="scroller" pluginspage="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" quality="high" src="scroller_en.swf" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="927" wmode="transparent"/>
    </object>
   </div>
  </div>
  <script src="http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js" type="text/javascript">
  </script>
  <script type="text/javascript">
   _uacct = "UA-316143-2";
urchinTracker();
  </script>
 </body>
</html>
