<html>
 <head>
  <title>
   degob.org
  </title>
  <link href="degob.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
  <script language="JavaScript">
   <!-- Hide the script from old browsers --

	var current;

	function toc(toc_id) {

		toc_element = document.getElementById(toc_id);

		if ((toc_element.style.display=='none')||(toc_element.style.display=='')) {
			toc_element.style.display='block';
		}
		else {
			toc_element.style.display='none';
		}
	}


    // --end hiding here -->
  </script>
 </head>
 <body>
  <div id="wrapper">
   <div id="header">
   </div>
   <div id="main_wrapper">
    <div id="left_menu">
     <div id="left_menu_content">
      <a class="menu_main" href="?extsearch">
       Search
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php">
       Main page
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=203">
       On DEGOB
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2049">
       The Survivor Witnesses
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="?glossary">
       Glossary
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Encylopedia of Camps
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Supporters
      </a>
      <br/>
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="content_container">
     <div id="content">
      <div>
       <div style="float:left;display:inline">
        <h1 style="display:inline">
         Protocol Nr. 3662
        </h1>
       </div>
       <a href="?showjk_img=3662" style="text-decoration:none; color:#453c2d; ">
        <span style="vertical-align:middle; cursor:pointer; float:right; font-size:11px; width:126px; height:17px;  background-image:url('http://degob.hu/images/arrow_l.jpg'); background-repeat:no-repeat; color:#453c2d; font-weight:bold;">
         <span style="padding-left:30px;">
          scanned image
         </span>
        </span>
       </a>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both; margin-bottom:25px;">
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         D. M.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         male
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
      </div>
      <br/>
      <br/>
      The person in question has given us the following information:


In the period before the ghetto, still in the days after the Germans invasion 
of Hungary the Jewish Council made me appear in its main office and appointed me 
as the head of its technical department. In this period me and my staff 
sabotaged as much as we could the Germans material demands. The current value 
of demanded goods that we failed to provide can be estimated at a few million 
forints. Both me and my colleagues were taken away a few times from the office 
but eventually we went through these months with difficulties but safe. 
October the 15th, 1944, when the Regents son was taken away and there were 
shootings in the street people started to feel insecure and confused in the 
offices of the Jewish Council. That day, the Council decreed that all the 
members of its organisation should leave the main office before the end of 
working hours. Overnight, the political situation completely changed. While a 
few hours before, Regent Horthys announcement was read in the radio claiming 
that Hungary was going to make a separate peace treaty and would turn against 
German fascism, by the morning Szálasi took power. 
In the morning, starred houses were closed and instantly armed atrocities were 
started against Jews all around the city. I neither listened to the radio nor 
read the journals and as I went to bed early, tired of the perturbations of the 
day before, in the morning I went totally uninformed into the main office of the 
council. I got to the building with some difficulties. It was completely empty 
guarded only by the doorkeeper. The Jewish labour service company accommodated 
in an attached building was on the alert. Its members could not get into the 
councils building as they were guarded by armed men. On this first day well-
armed squads of the Arrow Cross repeatedly got into the building willing to 
occupy it, and on the pretext of searching for weapons they demanded the keys of 
the safe. Already the first squad wanted to take me away. It was when I made 
that famous phone call with the not long ago executed vitéz gendarme Lieutenant 
Colonel László Ferenczy, who had been the ministerial commissioner responsible 
for Jewish matters. I asked for his help against the Arrow Cross. He refused me 
but I managed to mislead the invading armed men saying that my intervention on 
the phone was successful and claimed that a squad car had been sent to the 
councils building. As a result the armed men left frightened, and I managed to 
mislead also others, so there were no searches in the building of the Jewish 
Council, neither this day nor later in the Szálasi era, and none of our safes 
was opened, in which we managed to preserve the valuables of Jewish institutions 
and the very precious golden treasures of the Kadisa of Pest. In the next few 
days first I put on the military armband, later some parts of a suit, and 
finally my uniform as a captain, in which, as a self-made commander I did 
illegal service till the day of liberation. In two-three weeks also some of my 
eminent colleagues came into the office, and we managed to liberate members of 
the council from their home captivity with the help of labour service military 
guards and took them into the building of the council. Later, first of all Lajos 
Stöckler, member of the council took over the lead. As the members of the old 
council went missing a new administrative body was established, and Jaross, who 
had been the Minister of the Interior of the Szálasi government (and had been 
executed since then) selected the third Jewish Council where partly new people 
got into leading positions. The organisation of the Council was completely 
changed, since the members of the old staff were either forced into trench 
digger companies or were deported and we were needed to involve new men, people 
who somehow ended up here and seemed at least partially competent.
The first days were the days of atrocities. Jews were shot or killed in 
different ways on the street, on the squares, in flats, or in other places. In 
these days authorities were completely uninformed and the chaos was so great 
that police asked us to take measures regarding the atrocities because they 
considered the Jewish Council as the highest authority above people wearing a 
yellow star. Even the ambulance service needed our involvement, so much so, that 
they set up the Voluntary Ambulance Service of Budapest in the building of the 
Jewish Council. 
The next ordeal for us was the instruction of the Arrow Cross forcing thousands 
of Budapest Jews into the two largest synagogues. Many were robbed there with 
the assistance of armed policemen. We made extreme efforts to provide some food 
to these prisoners who were completely sealed off. There were some who died on 
the pews, some who went mad because of the threats of the Arrow Cross. In the 
first instance we managed to get them free ca. 6,000 prisoners, so we could help 
their way back into their flats aided by a police escort in groups divided 
according to streets. Later, however, it happened that during the night they 
snatched prisoners of the synagogue and deported them. 
As a next move the Jews of Budapest, especially the younger generations  both 
men and women  were forced into labour service to dig trenches. At the same 
time, and as a continuation, on the other bank of the Danube masses of people, 
who were later deported, were now concentrated in one of the big brick 
factories.
In the first weeks all our efforts were spent on saving at least those people in 
whose case we could use some pretext. We sent horse-drawn wagons to the brick 
factory and other gathering places to take away the old, the sick, and the 
handicapped in return for money or for other things. During these rescue actions 
we could save a few thousands of people. 
With these events in mind already in the first days of the Szálasi regime the 
idea of establishing a ghetto was born. After long negotiations supported by 
foreign embassies of Budapest finally the two parties agreed to set up a ghetto 
in the 7th district of the city involving the streets that were the most densely 
populated by Jews. The Arrow Cross wanted to concentrate these people in a 
territory as small as possible, while our goal was to use the largest possible 
space for the planned ghetto, and this confrontation caused innumerable 
difficulties. When the negotiations were finally closed we realised that they 
forced almost 70,000 people into a place which could house around 25-30,000. 
First, this ghetto was sealed off by armed guards, later, using the money of the 
Jews and Jewish workforce they had an enclosure of planks built around it. It is 
characteristic of the times that in the original regulation they insisted that a 
separate street was to be given to converted Jews. These converts were not 
required to put the yellow star on but were permitted to sew only a simple 
yellow patch on their cloth. They obliged the Jewish Council to secure their 
complete separation from Israelite Jews. It is worth mentioning that this 
favouritism was not used by anyone: the inhabitants of the ghetto were blended 
without any sign of differentiation. Christian churches then demanded separate 
rooms from the Jewish Council where they could hold masses in accordance with 
the rules. 
The first great problem was providing food supplies for the ghetto. We set up 
soup-kitchens and relied on food supplies coming from outside but the results 
were poor and far from satisfying. At the beginning, city authorities helped us 
with food  naturally we had to pay for it. Later, the Arrow Cross did not allow 
this practice. Several occasions when we were carrying food to the starving 
people of the ghetto from the stores of Joint, which belonged to the 
international Red Cross and was set up outside the ghetto, we were attacked by 
soldiers of the Arrow Cross, and we could feel fortunate if the Jews responsible 
for the delivery were not killed but only the food was seized.  
Sanitation in the ghetto was another great problem as mostly old and sick people 
lived in this enclosed area. We needed to establish emergency hospitals in the 
apartment houses without any equipment. Seriously sick people lay in the most 
primitively furnished rooms and it was only due to the self-sacrifice of doctors 
that the ghetto did not suffer greater losses (...) it was as difficult as 
providing food supplies.
As the life in the ghetto normalized, we needed institutional solutions for our 
problems. However, the greatest obstacle was the siege of Budapest that had 
started in the meantime. Bombs and shells were falling on the buildings. We had 
to extinguish fire day and night and received no support from the fire-brigades 
of the capital. We had to free the injured people out of the ruins of buildings. 
These were the conditions among which the ghettos administrative bodies needed 
to operate. We established ten separate bodies which shared administrative 
duties. We were forced to set up a police of the ghetto, and to create a funeral 
office pressed also by the high mortality. As for funerals, we could deliver 
dead bodies outside the ghetto supported by the Communal Funerary Firm, later, 
however, there were no such opportunities at all, and we could not even dig 
graves because of the cold winter. By the day of liberation a few thousand 
unburied dead bodies were in the depot. 
While inner organisation of the ghetto began to take shape we needed to keep 
contact with the authorities that were above us during this hard time. We had to 
go to headquarters and bureaus every day. Sometimes we managed to attain that 
temporarily we were treated in a more humane way but mostly we besieged these 
authorities only to tell them our complains. There were again and again 
atrocities in the area of the ghetto, the Arrow Cross shot our fire brigade or 
ambulance men, sometimes they targeted pedestrians in the streets of the ghetto 
just for fun. When the day of liberation was approaching the chances of a pogrom 
started to grow again. They even started it one day when fascists attacked an 
air-raid shelter of an apartment house with machineguns, and discharged their 
bullets on innocent people killing everyone in the shelter. It is a miracle that 
this action did not continue. Little by little, we managed to have personal 
contacts even with certain men of the Arrow Cross, who then informed us about 
future actions against us. This is how we learnt that they were going to 
liquidate the entire population of the ghetto the day before the Red Army would 
have arrived.
We were informed that an armed command was ready to attack the ghetto from 
different sides at the same time and institutionally annihilate its population 
within a few hours. This commando was made up of German panzers with flame-
throwers, of a larger troop of the Arrow Cross and of policemen with 
machineguns. Having this in mind we prepared the side of the planked enclosure 
looking towards the attacking Russians so that we could easily knock it down 
when the attack started hoping that this way we would at least open the route of 
escape. It was a lucky coincidence that there were leading fascists who got 
scared of the plan of a mass killing, hence we managed to counteract and got the 
massacre delayed. This is the reason why the invading Read Army could save the 
starving population of the ghetto from death the 18th of January, 1945.
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="right_menu">
     <div id="right_menu_content">
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main_hu" href="index.php?showarticle=2031">
        The Holocaust in Hungary
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_1')">
        Perpetrators
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_1">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2011">
          The Gendarmerie
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2012">
          The Police
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2013">
          The Public Administration
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_2')">
        The Gentile Population
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_2">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2014">
          Indifference, Antipathy, Antisemitism
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2015">
          Hungarian Rescuers
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_12')">
        Regions of Destruction
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_12">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2016">
          The Capital: Budapest
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2033">
          A City in the Countryside: Balassagyarmat
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2034">
          A Village: Rákosszentmihály
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_4')">
        Women
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_4">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2017">
          Hungarian Jewish Women in the Kanadakommando
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2018">
          SS Female Overseers in Auschwitz
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2019">
        The First Massacre
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2020">
        Antisemitism
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2021">
        The Jewish Council
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2022">
        Resistance, Zionists
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_9')">
        Death Factory - Auschwitz-Birkenau 1944
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_9">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2023">
          Prisoners' Fate in Auschwitz-Birkenau
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2024">
          SS physicians
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2025">
          What did the Victims know?
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_10')">
        Rescue
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_10">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2026">
          Decent Gendarmes
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2027">
          Policemen
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2028">
          Humane Officials
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2029">
          The Military
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2030">
        Looting
       </a>
      </div>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2032">
       Labour Service
      </a>
      <script>
       toc('menu_12');toc('menu_12');
				if (current!=null) toc(current);
      </script>
     </div>
    </div>
   </div>
   <div id="footer">
   </div>
   <a href="http://degob.hu/index.php" style="text-decoration:none;" title="magyar">
    <div id="switch_banner" title="switch to Hungarian">
     váltás magyarra
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="bphm_banner">
    <a href="http://bphm.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="bphm.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/BPHM_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#1d3c51;font-size:9px;">
      bphm.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <div id="holomo_banner">
    <a href="http://www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/holo_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#5b4b32;font-size:9px;">
      holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <a href="index.php">
    <div id="home">
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="scroller">
    <object align="middle" classid="clsid:d27cdb6e-ae6d-11cf-96b8-444553540000" codebase="http://fpdownload.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=8,0,0,0" height="18" id="scroller" width="927">
     <param name="allowScriptAccess" value="sameDomain"/>
     <param name="movie" value="scroller_en.swf"/>
     <param name="quality" value="high"/>
     <param name="wmode" value="transparent"/>
     <param name="bgcolor" value="#000000"/>
     <embed align="middle" allowscriptaccess="sameDomain" bgcolor="#000000" height="18" name="scroller" pluginspage="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" quality="high" src="scroller_en.swf" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="927" wmode="transparent"/>
    </object>
   </div>
  </div>
  <script src="http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js" type="text/javascript">
  </script>
  <script type="text/javascript">
   _uacct = "UA-316143-2";
urchinTracker();
  </script>
 </body>
</html>
