<html>
 <head>
  <title>
   degob.org
  </title>
  <link href="degob.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
  <script language="JavaScript">
   <!-- Hide the script from old browsers --

	var current;

	function toc(toc_id) {

		toc_element = document.getElementById(toc_id);

		if ((toc_element.style.display=='none')||(toc_element.style.display=='')) {
			toc_element.style.display='block';
		}
		else {
			toc_element.style.display='none';
		}
	}


    // --end hiding here -->
  </script>
 </head>
 <body>
  <div id="wrapper">
   <div id="header">
   </div>
   <div id="main_wrapper">
    <div id="left_menu">
     <div id="left_menu_content">
      <a class="menu_main" href="?extsearch">
       Search
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php">
       Main page
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=203">
       On DEGOB
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2049">
       The Survivor Witnesses
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="?glossary">
       Glossary
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Encylopedia of Camps
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Supporters
      </a>
      <br/>
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="content_container">
     <div id="content">
      <div>
       <div style="float:left;display:inline">
        <h1 style="display:inline">
         Protocol Nr. 3148
        </h1>
       </div>
       <a href="?showjk_img=3148" style="text-decoration:none; color:#453c2d; ">
        <span style="vertical-align:middle; cursor:pointer; float:right; font-size:11px; width:126px; height:17px;  background-image:url('http://degob.hu/images/arrow_l.jpg'); background-repeat:no-repeat; color:#453c2d; font-weight:bold;">
         <span style="padding-left:30px;">
          scanned image
         </span>
        </span>
       </a>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both; margin-bottom:25px;">
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         H. M.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         female
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Mez?kövesd
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1923
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Mez?kövesd
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         seamstress
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Ghetto
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Mez?kövesd
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Camps
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Birkenau, Berlin, Schönholz, Reinickendorf, Oranienburg, Ravensbrück
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
      </div>
      <br/>
      <br/>
      The person in question has given us the following information:

Already before the 19th of March, 1944, people watched Jews with an evil glint 
in their eyes, especially the younger generations. 300 Jewish families lived 
here, who were mostly craftsmen. My father was a baker. He was interned already 
in 1941 for 9 months without any reason. After the 19th of March, this 
malevolent attitude towards Jews became only worse. They broke the windows of 
the Jewish temple, beat up the men who went to the street. We had to move into 
the ghetto the 10th of May. We, the young would go out to work. We received a 
work card but neither food nor money. One could not bring any food into the 
ghetto. Gendarmes constantly guarded the ghetto and regularly plundered its 
inhabitants. When in the morning we were led to the workplace Christian young 
men shouted sarcastic comments and ridiculed us. I would not say more mature 
people did the same. Men of the old world did not understand the propaganda and 
did not care about it either. Even if deep in their heart they may not liked 
Jews seeing them in that humiliated state, rushed like beasts, it came to their 
minds that these people were also human beings. They felt somewhat sorry for 
them because they were humans. We went to work to the tobacco supplier. Our 
superiors, the managers were decent people, who were good to us, and treated us 
in a human way but labourers were nasty and they avoided us. We stayed here for 
3 weeks. We felt optimistic about the future, the three weeks we passed at work 
made us think that it was indeed all about work. Instead, we were moved into the 
little ghetto at the end of the third week, and later were taken to Új-Győr, 
where they entrained us.

Gendarmes and Germans managed entrainment together. First, they gave a blow to 
all, and then crammed 78 people into a freight car. Already here, they tried to 
make sure that relatives and friends would not stay together. This is how I got 
separated from my younger sister and aunt. They did not give us food for the 
journey and not even let us bring our own food. We found a bucket of water in 
the car but it was overturned just after departure. Hence, I can say that they 
let us leave hungry and thirsty. We arrived in Kassa during the night. When we 
asked where we were heading they said we were going to work and if we did our 
job well we would have a good life. Having encouraged us so nicely they seized 
everything we had. When they finished searching us they chased us back in train. 
Through the tiny windows of freight cars now Germans pushed the threatening 
muzzles of their weapons and forced us to produce the valuables we still had. If 
we did not, they would shoot everyone, they said. Everyone tried to escape to 
the other end of the car, where they felt to be in greater security and more 
protected against potential bullets. 

Around four days later, we arrived in Auschwitz. Polish men and German soldiers 
came to receive the train. They ordered us to get off, and leave the luggage 
behind. When we got off I met my relatives and ran to join them. We hardly made 
100 meters together when they pulled me off the queue, while the others went on. 
Where? I do not know. 

They left me in front of the gate of a camp, where we had to wait for a very 
long time. When it was our turn, we got to know that we were taken to have a 
bath. We had to take off our clothes; we could keep only the shoes in the hand. 
First, we had to go into a big hall where they entirely depilated our bodies. 
This was followed by the bath. When we finished we got clothes. Some got only a 
slip, others a whole dress. It was like misery itself how we looked in our 
picturesque rags.

By chance I got into block 5 of Camp B 3. In general, everything depended on 
luck. 1050 of us stayed here. We lay on floor without blanket in flimsy rags. 
Not more than half an hour passed when a German soldier entered and made us 
queue up in lines of five people. We had to stand still. The person who risked 
to move was beaten up hard. As we were standing there the Lagerälteste entered 
and gave a long talk. She was a Polish Jewish girl, who had suffered there for 
years, and by now her human feelings had been completely eradicated. She did not 
see human beings in front of her eyes only the bodies filling the crematoria. 
"You want to go home?  she asked among other things. Cant you see how the 
chimneys of the crematorium are giving off the smoke? Do you know what it means? 
It means that the others, your mothers and children, are being burnt while we 
are talking here. You will end up also there because we just suffered here while 
you had a good life there, and you did not try to help us. When she finished we 
got food in a very calculated way: they laid a big pot in front of us full of 
dry grass as if we were beasts. 1,050 of us had to eat from this single pot 
using the hand like real beasts. After this talk we had not much appetite 
anyway, and had to slowly realise that having this rations we would indeed end 
up in fire even if with a little delay. They put our block in quarantine: no one 
could leave it. An unknown girl in some unclear function came in, and selected 
160 girls, among them also me, to carry the food. Only this group of 160 women 
could go out, and every time we went out we could see the fire burning in the 
crematorium spreading a characteristic smell in the whole area. We had the 
opportunity to talk with people working next to the crematorium. They told us 
that sometimes, when one transport followed the other there was not enough time 
to gas people. They were just thrown into the fire alive. The fire had 15-20 
meters high flames all the time. One day another transport arrived from 
Nyíregyháza. Many of them went mad during the journey. Temporarily, this group 
was crammed into our block, so for three days we could only stand, there was so 
little room. Our block was consisted of two rooms and a rather narrow corridor. 
This was where the people of Nyíregyháza were led in. One of them, who had gone 
insane in the train, broke the door and kept us in terror threatening us with 
various things. In panic we jumped out of window, only to meet the arms of SS 
guards who threatened us in a different, much more dangerous way. A few days 
later, Dr Mengele arrived to make selections. Mengele was a beautiful man, but 
as much he was a classical beauty so much he was an evil beast. He made people  
in our case women  undress nude and walk in front of him with upright arms. If 
he got to know that sisters stayed together he would surely single out one of 
them. The guards made a chain around the block to make sure no one ran away to 
another block where there were no selections going on. If Mengele thought that 
someone was about to run away, or was just contemplating about it, he gave such 
a big kick that the poor victim would fly until the gate. These selections were 
repeated every week. We had no water. Water had to be carried on a wagon, but we 
did not get it regularly. We discovered a small puddle in front of the block. We 
started to use it for drinking, so people got scarlet fever. The sick were taken 
away nude in closed cars. Where? One cannot tell. Since they never returned, 
most probably into the crematoria. Three weeks later, they took us into Birkenau 
to wash and disinfect us. They seized our clothes again. After the bath there 
were not enough rags for everyone, some had to go back covered by blankets. The 
note on the gate of Birkenau read "Vernichtungslager" (extermination camp). The 
person in charge of the crematorium was personally Himmler, who also visited the 
place twice. My first meeting with Himmler took place on the 14th of August. I 
was selected to be in a group. We were staying in the open all day long and were 
waiting. They separated the people able to work from those who were not. In the 
evening they took us to Brezsinka. There was an air raid alarm and they locked 
us into a gas chamber, probably only because they were in a hurry. When a 
Slovakian woman told us that this was a gas chamber we started to panic. We did 
not believe there was a real air raid any more, and we tried to jump out of the 
window shoving each other. The chamber had stair-like benches and a shower 
device. When the alarm was called off we indeed had a shower and were right away 
entrained. I arrived in the camp of Berlin-Schönholz, and was later transported 
to Reichendorf. 

In Reichendorf we worked for the Argus aircraft plant. When we arrived we had to 
lie in pulverized coal for three days. Finally, we were accommodated in the camp 
where we spent 6 months. The masters were German labourers who even helped us in 
our work. I can say this was the best period of deportation. We were not Jews 
here but labourers and there was no sharp difference between the ways they 
treated the others and us. Rations were not great, while work was hard. This was 
mens job. We cleaned the inner parts of aircraft engines. We worked in shifts; 
a shift meant 12 hours working time plus half an hour lunch break. Only every 
fourth Sunday was free. When we finished work there were the inevitable roll 
calls. Lagerführers were the most cruel. The greatest punishment was that they 
cut the hair off but one did not need to commit a capital crime to be judged 
worthy for it. We were promised we were going to have a peaceful Christmas but 
we passed the holiday doing 100 exercises - lying down and jumping up - and 
marching up and down all the morning. We got a coat and a pair of stocking only 
a week before Christmas. In the plant we worked with French and Czech labourers, 
who gave us information about the war and we started to have very hopeful 
spirits. Although officially it was forbidden to talk to each other we always 
found secret occasions for that. If they caught you, you had do the exercises 
and to march up and down in the courtyard for hours. After Christmas I had an 
inner bleeding in the lung and was put in hospital for 8 weeks. Ten days after 
that I recovered I started digging trenches. It happened this time that they 
almost beat a woman to death because she had gone mad, and as she still did not 
die she was shot. The day after another woman broke out into paroxysm and was 
chased against the electric fence, and another unfortunate was shot. After this 
series of happenings we were transferred into the lager of the sick in 
Ravensbrück. 

During the first general roll call my feet got frozen. There were selections 
also here. They selected the weak, among them also me, and moved us into the 
youth camp, which was an extermination camp. For my luck, another selecting 
committee controlled us again and left alive those who were in better physical 
conditions and took the rest  among others ten years old children  into the 
crematorium. The 13th of March there were new selections. They did them in the 
open where we were waiting barefoot in a shirt for hours to see what they decide 
about our fate. The same doctor came as last time. He recognised me and selected 
me again. When the foreman saw how many people were being taken away he cried 
out: "You take away so many people again when I do not have enough people for 
work!" As a result, a few of us were taken back. From this time on, I became so 
sick that they put me into the infirmary of Ravensbrück.

I completely lost my consciousness and when I recovered Russians had already 
arrived. Russians came into the camp the 1st of May and gave us the best medical 
treatment possible. The 10th of May, they moved me into the youth camp, which 
was turned into a hospital. 

I came home from this hospital. I would like to find my relatives and work. One 
of my aims is to emigrate to Palestine.
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="right_menu">
     <div id="right_menu_content">
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main_hu" href="index.php?showarticle=2031">
        The Holocaust in Hungary
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_1')">
        Perpetrators
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_1">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2011">
          The Gendarmerie
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2012">
          The Police
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2013">
          The Public Administration
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_2')">
        The Gentile Population
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_2">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2014">
          Indifference, Antipathy, Antisemitism
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2015">
          Hungarian Rescuers
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_12')">
        Regions of Destruction
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_12">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2016">
          The Capital: Budapest
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2033">
          A City in the Countryside: Balassagyarmat
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2034">
          A Village: Rákosszentmihály
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_4')">
        Women
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_4">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2017">
          Hungarian Jewish Women in the Kanadakommando
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2018">
          SS Female Overseers in Auschwitz
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2019">
        The First Massacre
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2020">
        Antisemitism
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2021">
        The Jewish Council
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2022">
        Resistance, Zionists
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_9')">
        Death Factory - Auschwitz-Birkenau 1944
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_9">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2023">
          Prisoners' Fate in Auschwitz-Birkenau
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2024">
          SS physicians
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2025">
          What did the Victims know?
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_10')">
        Rescue
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_10">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2026">
          Decent Gendarmes
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2027">
          Policemen
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2028">
          Humane Officials
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2029">
          The Military
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2030">
        Looting
       </a>
      </div>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2032">
       Labour Service
      </a>
      <script>
       toc('menu_12');toc('menu_12');
				if (current!=null) toc(current);
      </script>
     </div>
    </div>
   </div>
   <div id="footer">
   </div>
   <a href="http://degob.hu/index.php" style="text-decoration:none;" title="magyar">
    <div id="switch_banner" title="switch to Hungarian">
     váltás magyarra
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="bphm_banner">
    <a href="http://bphm.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="bphm.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/BPHM_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#1d3c51;font-size:9px;">
      bphm.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <div id="holomo_banner">
    <a href="http://www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/holo_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#5b4b32;font-size:9px;">
      holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <a href="index.php">
    <div id="home">
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="scroller">
    <object align="middle" classid="clsid:d27cdb6e-ae6d-11cf-96b8-444553540000" codebase="http://fpdownload.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=8,0,0,0" height="18" id="scroller" width="927">
     <param name="allowScriptAccess" value="sameDomain"/>
     <param name="movie" value="scroller_en.swf"/>
     <param name="quality" value="high"/>
     <param name="wmode" value="transparent"/>
     <param name="bgcolor" value="#000000"/>
     <embed align="middle" allowscriptaccess="sameDomain" bgcolor="#000000" height="18" name="scroller" pluginspage="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" quality="high" src="scroller_en.swf" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="927" wmode="transparent"/>
    </object>
   </div>
  </div>
  <script src="http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js" type="text/javascript">
  </script>
  <script type="text/javascript">
   _uacct = "UA-316143-2";
urchinTracker();
  </script>
 </body>
</html>
