<html>
 <head>
  <title>
   degob.org
  </title>
  <link href="degob.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
  <script language="JavaScript">
   <!-- Hide the script from old browsers --

	var current;

	function toc(toc_id) {

		toc_element = document.getElementById(toc_id);

		if ((toc_element.style.display=='none')||(toc_element.style.display=='')) {
			toc_element.style.display='block';
		}
		else {
			toc_element.style.display='none';
		}
	}


    // --end hiding here -->
  </script>
 </head>
 <body>
  <div id="wrapper">
   <div id="header">
   </div>
   <div id="main_wrapper">
    <div id="left_menu">
     <div id="left_menu_content">
      <a class="menu_main" href="?extsearch">
       Search
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php">
       Main page
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=203">
       On DEGOB
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2049">
       The Survivor Witnesses
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="?glossary">
       Glossary
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Encylopedia of Camps
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Supporters
      </a>
      <br/>
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="content_container">
     <div id="content">
      <div>
       <div style="float:left;display:inline">
        <h1 style="display:inline">
         Protocol Nr. 1977
        </h1>
       </div>
       <a href="?showjk_img=1977" style="text-decoration:none; color:#453c2d; ">
        <span style="vertical-align:middle; cursor:pointer; float:right; font-size:11px; width:126px; height:17px;  background-image:url('http://degob.hu/images/arrow_l.jpg'); background-repeat:no-repeat; color:#453c2d; font-weight:bold;">
         <span style="padding-left:30px;">
          scanned image
         </span>
        </span>
       </a>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both; margin-bottom:25px;">
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         B. T.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         male
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Budapest
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1927
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Budapest
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         weaver
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Camps
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Bruck a./L, Mauthausen, Günskirchen
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
      </div>
      <br/>
      <br/>
      The person in question has given us the following information:

On the 20th of November 1944, the Arrow Cross took me away from the 
house where I lived. It was when they collected all Jewish men 
between the age of 16 and 60. First, I dug trenches on barren 
fields close to Soroksár, later they moved me to Albertfalva, and 
Budafok. We went on walking for an entire week without any reason, 
only to suffer. Meanwhile, I received a Swiss letter of 
protection, so I left the group and got into the camp in Jókai 
Street no. 1 in Budapest. We used to go to work from here, I 
shovelled coal at the railway station of Ferencváros. On the 27th 
of November, Jews could not go into the street, so this day our 
relatives could not bring us food. The following day, they herded 
us to the railway station of Józsefváros, which took us by 
surprise, and we had nothing to eat because of the above reasons. 
Officially, we got no food for the journey. We travelled for 5 
days, and they opened the door only once when they gave each of us 
800 grams of bread. The train stood still a lot on the road, and 
peasants and policemen abused our situation and charged 100 peng?s 
for a sip of water. We were standing in the car although there was 
hardly enough room for standing, not to mention sitting.
On the 20th of November 1944, the Arrow Cross took me away from the 
house where I lived. It was when they collected all Jewish men 
between the age of 16 and 60. First, I dug trenches on barren 
fields close to Soroksár, later they moved me to Albertfalva, and 
Budafok. We went on walking for an entire week without any reason, 
only to suffer. Meanwhile, I received a Swiss letter of 
protection, so I left the group and got into the camp in Jókai 
Street no. 1 in Budapest. We used to go to work from here, I 
shovelled coal at the railway station of Ferencváros. On the 27th 
of November, Jews could not go into the street, so this day our 
relatives could not bring us food. The following day, they herded 
us to the railway station of Józsefváros, which took us by 
surprise, and we had nothing to eat because of the above reasons. 
Officially, we got no food for the journey. We travelled for 5 
days, and they opened the door only once when they gave each of us 
800 grams of bread. The train stood still a lot on the road, and 
peasants and policemen abused our situation and charged 100 peng?s 
for a sip of water. We were standing in the car although there was 
hardly enough room for standing, not to mention sitting.

When we arrived in Bruck, we could hardly get off the train for we 
were so weak. We were lodged in a barn. The roof had holes and the 
snow fell in and the wind blew through. We suffered much from the 
cold. Later, when a stone building became empty we could occupy 
it. In the beginning we went to work in Panndorf by train. We dug 
trenches. People were chased and beaten at work. If you were frail 
and could not walk but lay down in the barn you got frozen. Most 
of the people who died either froze to death or died from 
exhaustion. Provisions were tolerable but very little. We were 
terribly cold and hungry. Austrian peasants gave us food if they 
could afford to but they were also much terrorised by the 
Lagerführers. 

At the end of March, we went on foot to Altenburg where they 
boarded us onto barges. We travelled for a week without any food. 
They kept encouraging us that we would get food at the next stop 
but it never happened. People were bags of bones and died one 
after the other. We threw the corpses into the Danube. In the 
bottom of the ship we found oats and other kinds of seeds 
collected there and half eaten by rats, and we ate them, too. When 
we arrived in Mauthausen we had to run to the bank on a narrow 
plank. Several of the completely enfeebled people who were walking 
unsteadily fell into the water. They let them drown. Instead of 
helping them the SS shot at them if their heads reappeared. Locals 
grouped there and found it amusing.

I stayed in Mauthausen for two weeks. The only good thing that 
happened was that I met my elder brother, who had been in labour 
service. Both of us cried when we looked at each other because we 
were in such conditions. Starvation and maltreatment continued and 
more and more people passed away. We carried on again on foot 
towards Günskirchen. They chased us and gave us a rest only once 
in two days but not even once did we get food. Great numbers of 
people died on the way. The people who fell behind, who were weak, 
or fell over were shot. In Günskirchen it was pouring rain. We 
stayed in the barrack all the time and it was like hell. There was 
hardly enough room to sit on our rucksacks with curled-up legs. 
There was horrible squalor and stink; people would fight while the 
sick and the healthy were pressed to each other. It was a ghastly 
situation. 250-300 of us died every day. Every morning we had to 
carry 25-30 corpses out of the barrack. There were innumerable 
lice and naturally there was typhus spreading. Americans saved us 
from this hell on the 4th of May.
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="right_menu">
     <div id="right_menu_content">
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main_hu" href="index.php?showarticle=2031">
        The Holocaust in Hungary
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_1')">
        Perpetrators
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_1">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2011">
          The Gendarmerie
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2012">
          The Police
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2013">
          The Public Administration
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_2')">
        The Gentile Population
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_2">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2014">
          Indifference, Antipathy, Antisemitism
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2015">
          Hungarian Rescuers
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_12')">
        Regions of Destruction
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_12">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2016">
          The Capital: Budapest
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2033">
          A City in the Countryside: Balassagyarmat
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2034">
          A Village: Rákosszentmihály
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_4')">
        Women
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_4">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2017">
          Hungarian Jewish Women in the Kanadakommando
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2018">
          SS Female Overseers in Auschwitz
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2019">
        The First Massacre
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2020">
        Antisemitism
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2021">
        The Jewish Council
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2022">
        Resistance, Zionists
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_9')">
        Death Factory - Auschwitz-Birkenau 1944
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_9">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2023">
          Prisoners' Fate in Auschwitz-Birkenau
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2024">
          SS physicians
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2025">
          What did the Victims know?
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_10')">
        Rescue
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_10">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2026">
          Decent Gendarmes
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2027">
          Policemen
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2028">
          Humane Officials
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2029">
          The Military
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2030">
        Looting
       </a>
      </div>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2032">
       Labour Service
      </a>
      <script>
       toc('menu_12');toc('menu_12');
				if (current!=null) toc(current);
      </script>
     </div>
    </div>
   </div>
   <div id="footer">
   </div>
   <a href="http://degob.hu/index.php" style="text-decoration:none;" title="magyar">
    <div id="switch_banner" title="switch to Hungarian">
     váltás magyarra
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="bphm_banner">
    <a href="http://bphm.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="bphm.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/BPHM_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#1d3c51;font-size:9px;">
      bphm.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <div id="holomo_banner">
    <a href="http://www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/holo_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#5b4b32;font-size:9px;">
      holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <a href="index.php">
    <div id="home">
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="scroller">
    <object align="middle" classid="clsid:d27cdb6e-ae6d-11cf-96b8-444553540000" codebase="http://fpdownload.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=8,0,0,0" height="18" id="scroller" width="927">
     <param name="allowScriptAccess" value="sameDomain"/>
     <param name="movie" value="scroller_en.swf"/>
     <param name="quality" value="high"/>
     <param name="wmode" value="transparent"/>
     <param name="bgcolor" value="#000000"/>
     <embed align="middle" allowscriptaccess="sameDomain" bgcolor="#000000" height="18" name="scroller" pluginspage="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" quality="high" src="scroller_en.swf" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="927" wmode="transparent"/>
    </object>
   </div>
  </div>
  <script src="http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js" type="text/javascript">
  </script>
  <script type="text/javascript">
   _uacct = "UA-316143-2";
urchinTracker();
  </script>
 </body>
</html>
