<html>
 <head>
  <title>
   degob.org
  </title>
  <link href="degob.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
  <script language="JavaScript">
   <!-- Hide the script from old browsers --

	var current;

	function toc(toc_id) {

		toc_element = document.getElementById(toc_id);

		if ((toc_element.style.display=='none')||(toc_element.style.display=='')) {
			toc_element.style.display='block';
		}
		else {
			toc_element.style.display='none';
		}
	}


    // --end hiding here -->
  </script>
 </head>
 <body>
  <div id="wrapper">
   <div id="header">
   </div>
   <div id="main_wrapper">
    <div id="left_menu">
     <div id="left_menu_content">
      <a class="menu_main" href="?extsearch">
       Search
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php">
       Main page
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=203">
       On DEGOB
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2049">
       The Survivor Witnesses
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="?glossary">
       Glossary
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Encylopedia of Camps
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Supporters
      </a>
      <br/>
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="content_container">
     <div id="content">
      <div>
       <div style="float:left;display:inline">
        <h1 style="display:inline">
         Protocol Nr. 3618
        </h1>
       </div>
       <a href="?showjk_img=3618" style="text-decoration:none; color:#453c2d; ">
        <span style="vertical-align:middle; cursor:pointer; float:right; font-size:11px; width:126px; height:17px;  background-image:url('http://degob.hu/images/arrow_l.jpg'); background-repeat:no-repeat; color:#453c2d; font-weight:bold;">
         <span style="padding-left:30px;">
          scanned image
         </span>
        </span>
       </a>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both; margin-bottom:25px;">
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         dr. L. L.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         male
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Szeged
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1889
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Szeged
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         merchant
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Ghetto
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Szeged
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Camps
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Budapest - Columbus utcai tábor
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
      </div>
      <br/>
      <br/>
      The person in question has given us the following information:
 
On the 8th of May, 1944, with respect to their merits in war 6 Jewish 
officers and I as a reservist captain were called up by the headquarters in 
Szeged in accordance with the laws of those times. These were Dezső Beck 
(of Szőreg), Dezső Patzauer (Szeged), Dr Márton Weisz (Szeged) and Lénárt 
(Szabadka). The goal was to enrol the Jews who had merits in the last war 
into the troops of the labour service so that these privileged people would 
make up half of the guards and the commanding bodies. There had been 
already a company like this put together in Szeged, where the second 
commander was Reservist Lieutenant Sándor Stein. 
 
Six of us together with a relevant number of non-commissioned officers and 
an equivalent number of non-Jewish officers with non-commissioned officers 
were directed to the call-up centre of Szamosújvár by the headquarters in 
Szeged. The headquarters of Szamosújvár did not yet receive the relevant 
decree of the Ministry of Defence, therefore we Jews were sent back to 
Szeged with an official letter of exemption after a few days stay. The 
headquarters of Szamosújvár had to react this way also because the Jews of 
the area and also of all of Transylvania had been concentrated in the 
ghetto of the brick factory already at the beginning of March. 
 
The Hungarian police and gendarmes ignored the call-up published by the 
Ministry of Defence ###  
 
### it was ... (prohibited) to open the windows of the flats, moreover, 
devices of gas and electric meters were taken away. Let us remember: in 
overcrowded flats, where people, as I have said, hardly knew each other! 
This is of course nothing compared to what followed later, but behind these 
measures one can imagine the anonymous members of the authorities with 
intentions to make people suffer. Police Counsellor Kamarás protested 
against dismantling the gas and electric meters, moreover, he was informed 
that this would not be ordered. 
 
 
By the 15th of June, authorities considered the phase of moving Jewish 
people into the ghetto finished, and the time was ripe for making the 
suffering people experience new terrible torments. The sadism of the 
authorities was exceptional. At 9 pm the infamous commander of the ghetto, 
chief consultant of the police Keresztes, appeared at the gate with his 
squad, that is, with his permanent deputy police inspector Kovács and 
several other non-commissioned officers from the police. We cannot deny 
that the latter, except for a few, treated the people in a humane manner; 
in their own way they tried to alleviate the suffering of the victims. The 
chief consultant called together the leaders of the houses of the ghetto 
and told them his instructions regarding the day after: by 6 am the whole 
ghetto should be ready to leave. This order revealed great malevolence as 
well, since even children knew it was impossible to search and carry away 
so many people with the available vehicles. But its goal was accomplished. 
There was panic among the tormented people of the ghetto. A great number of 
them committed suicide. It was horrible to listen to the noise of the 
ambulances which were called into the ghetto all night. 
 
All these unprepared, rushed instructions given during this fatal night 
were irresponsibly shallow. The chief consultant mercifully gave his 
consent to the propositions we made, with a false benevolence and 
misleadingly on purpose. If anyone was informed he was surely one of the 
best informed. He knew why the building at the corner of Margit Street No. 
20. was designated to be the place where the deportation and the transports 
should start. It was because they wanted to use the ground floor and the 
storey of the house as places where they could rob the tortured people, and 
this robbing was officially called by the euphemism: police search. 
Naturally, they did not tell us the objective of the transport, or its 
destination. Why to tell in advance, when being silent can only increase 
panic in the frightened people? 
 
Searching people was carried out the following way: The victims were let in 
through the gate of the religious house facing Margit Street, and were 
tortured as if on a conveyer belt in the flat on the ground floor and in 
the offices on the first floor. The robbed people could leave through the 
gate looking at Josika Street. Between the two gates no mortal, that is, no 
one who was meant to be searched or was already searched could communicate, 
so that the inhabitants of the ghetto would not learn how much they were 
going to be robbed, including those, with regard to whom the chief 
consultant ### 
 
 
### Immánuel Lőw, who was still mentally a bright person at the age of 91 
() it is the shame of Szeged that no one among the free citizens did 
intervene in the slightest way for him, for a person who passed a century 
in Szeged. As a result of the gratitude of his home town, he died three 
weeks later, on the 19th of June from the disease he was infected with on 
the top floor of the oven of the brick factory. His deportation suited the 
reputation of Szeged. It meant the deportation of a member of the foreign 
academies, of an honorary doctor of universities, of an ex-member of the 
Upper Chamber of the Hungarian parliament. 
 
On the 20th of June, a Wednesday, the last members of the Jewish population 
of Szeged were driven into the brick factory. A great number of old and 
sick people were taken from the Jewish hospital which had been hastily 
set up in the place of the orphanage and the local charity. 5o clock in 
the afternoon, the head of the whole kidnapping action, the SS captain 
Angermayer appeared by car at the gate of the brick factory having already 
inquired from Dr. Imre Deutsch  whom he had known from the Supportive 
Office  whether me and Dr. Jenő Frenkel, Ernő Kertész, Dr. Adolf 
Silberstein, and Dr. József Radó were in the camp. He called us to his car. 
The fact that he had primarily made an inquiry regarding us reveals that 
our names were given to him some way, and it was not us who had approached 
him. 
 
Of course, we had no clue why he gathered us. Neither did we know why he 
picked us and not others. The captain gave me a long German letter (as I 
knew German the best among us) that came from Budapest and I had to read 
it. The author of the letter, to the surprise of all of us, was the manager 
of the Keren Hajeszod, Ernő Szilágyi, an old Zionist friend of us. Our 
names were listed at the bottom of the letter. This explains why only 
Zionists got together here. I recognised his signature as original and also 
the people next to me. It necessarily crossed our mind that the German 
commander wanted to use us for a kind of trick, since it was a German who 
passed us the letter. In this letter Szilágyi approached us as his old 
friends, telling us that he was going to ease the condition of the Jews of 
the country. Since his letter was passed through German hands of high 
officers, he could not communicate it openly. We were also worried not to 
be used as spies against our Jewish brothers. 
 
Szilágyis mission was to select 3,000 Jews from the camp according to the 
following criteria: 
1. families with many children 
2. families of labour servicemen 
3. members of the families of those who prominently participated in the 
religious bodies of the Jews. 
 
The captain demanded this list be prepared in two days, by Thursday 5 pm. 
He expected us to keep everything in absolute secret, this is why he did 
not allow me to translate Szilágyis letter into Hungarian so that no 
bystander could understand it. Next to the three criteria listed in 
Szilágyis letter there was an inventory attached which was prepared in 
Budapest. The captain meant to give us this inventory only Wednesday 
evening, because he wanted to control also this way whether we did not put 
on the list people who did not merit it. In case we did not include someone 
from the inventory of Budapest into the final list we were expected to 
explain our reasoning, and also to prepare a separate list of these people. 
Among these were Dr. Róbert Pap, Pál Hoffmann and Imre Weisz. 
 
To finish our job faster the captain gave us a typewriter, pens, carbon 
paper and manifold paper. 
 
We set up our office in a small room of the factory. It was furnished in 
the most primitive way. Through the glassless windows hundreds of flies 
flew in from the neighbouring junk heap. In front of the door there was a 
mound of slag slippery because of rain so the room was hardly accessible. 
Our tables and chairs were planks laid on bricks. This is where we toiled 
from dawn to dusk, often at candlelight till late night. 
 
The day after, Wednesday morning, the inhabitants of the camp had to be 
counted. Not to be upheld in our work, they started the whole process with 
us. This revealed for everyone in the camp that we had a special mission. 
When the counting was finished one of the SS sergeants (the person who was 
the most compassionate with us among his companions in the next days) gave 
us the inventory originally attached to Szilágyis letter, the so-called 
"Prominent List". Analysing the names in this list we could conclude that 
it had been put together by the National Office, the Orthodox Central 
Office and the Hungarian Zionist Association (MCSZ) in agreement with each 
other. But knowing how much German executives bodies were malicious and 
dishonest, we could not get rid of the idea that this selected group of 
people were to be used as hostages. 
 
We have divided the work between five of us the following way. We who came 
from Szeged dealt with people of Szeged, the gentlemen of Hódmezővásárhely 
prepared the list of the people coming from the countryside communities and 
were aided in their work by the religious heads of the communities. There 
were 8,400 people in the camp, half of them from Szeged, hence we had 1,500 
places on the list. 
 
In order to sustain our work the captain gave us the register of the city 
of Szeged which he had had prepared still during springtime through the 
office of the religious community. It turned out during the process of our 
work that this list was completely unreliable, therefore it was the source 
of a great number of just complaints. Since time was short and we were 
unorganised we could not solve this problem. It was common knowledge that 
the Bureau of the Food Administration did not register people according to 
their religion but according to their race. As a consequence those who had 
converted long ago were registered as Christians and were not included on 
the list we had to use. As a result we had no idea how many converts there 
were in reality in the brick factory. 
 
We prepared the list for the train. There was a list of 3,000 that was not 
made public although this was the original goal of our commission. The 
captain came to our office Wednesday afternoon and to our shock invalidated 
the instructions he had given us the day before. 
 
According to the new order the number of people who could be included on 
the list was not 3,000 but only 2,400. Except for the prominent people 
children could be accepted only under the age of 12, adults only older than 
50. We right away countered that 50-year-old parents do not have children 
younger than 12, therefore this instruction separated members of families 
from each other. Und wenn schon, dass ist kein Standpunkt! Dass 
interressiert uns ganz und gar nicht" the SS captain responded shortly, and 
no pleading could change this heartless attitude. "Morgen 5 Uhr alles 
durchgeführt! Verstanden? Sie haften mit dem Kopf!" He also assured us that 
he was going to count the selected people and those who were not included 
into the throng of 2,400 would be shot in the presence of the others. 
 
I cannot detail how much the five of us were disheartened. We knew that the 
German captain, who showed no mercy towards the old, the mortally sick, and 
the pregnant would not let anyone make a joke of it. The five of us agreed 
that we would at least protect the young (as it happened in the case of the 
Youth Aliyah meant for Palestine), if this list gave any kind of protection 
at all to anyone. 
 
The list was ready on time, by Thursday 5 pm. The five of us, who were 
safe, unanimously thought it was awful. If it were to have any role, it 
would lead to the separation of members of families. Late afternoon, the 
inhabitants of the camp were ordered to appear in the courtyard of the 
brick factory and the captain had this terrible list read out to them. Each 
person listed had to pass in front of him so that he could personally 
control whether we complied with the rule regarding the age limits of 12 
and 50. A tremendous panic came to the people after the list was read out. 
As we did not even knw what significance this list had, the rest of the 
camp was even less informed. However, everyone felt that it could mean only 
something terrible if parents and their small children could not be 
included in the same group. 
 
If we look at it today, perhaps we would reckon that this instruction 
expressed the greatest benevolence of the Germans towards us. Now, we would 
be glad about this selection. But no one among us could understand or 
appreciate a command that let the young and the old go to Austria instead 
of Auschwitz only to survive it. In Auschwitz middle-aged men and women 
were not touched. Only the captain knew how the selections in Auschwitz 
functioned, that members of families would be separated anyway, it was only 
a matter of time when they had to go through a selection like this, either 
in Szeged or elsewhere, but this way the major part of the members of the 
Szeged camp may survive. 
 
Seeing this terrible panic the captain retreated. The anxious Jews could 
not calm down any more. But no one can blame the five members of our 
committee that we did not react in a more thoughtful and foreseeing manner 
among the throng of panicking people. 
 
This confusion was only purposefully strengthened through the games of the 
German officers and their deputies. This was still new to us, but since 
then we have heard from many camps how masterfully the Germans played these 
nerve-racking games. There was not much necessity to it, only to give 
contradicting orders day after day. And when mothers were lying 
unconsciously on the ground all over, the captain made the off-handed 
remark: "Na ja, das hat die bekannte jüdishe Herzlosigkeit getan! Dieser 
Unsinn, die Familienmitglieder von ainander zu trennen." 
 
It is an important detail regarding the list for the trains that whereas 
the captain had annulled it Saturday morning, the 24th, he kept to his order 
given on Thursday that 3,000 of those who had not been enlisted by the 
nullified list of 2,400 had to entrain Saturday as the first transport. In 
those days we were outraged by contradictory orders like that. Now, we know 
very well that these confusing measures were a disguised means of torturing 
the Jews, something that the Germans commanded so well. Innumerable fathers 
and mothers left with this first entrained transport not to be separated 
from their children. Many converts joined this group, too. Great numbers of 
relatives of labour servicemen kept with this group as well since they 
hoped to meet their relatives in labour service because the Germans spread 
the information that this transport would travel only a few hours and would 
remain in the country. Germans also said that the transport would go 
directly to Topolya. There were some who left because his or her relative 
had been interned there in the spring. No wonder that the people who were 
able to bring Auschwitz into existence delighted in provoking so fraudulent 
situations. We cannot be made responsible for the spread of these rumours 
in the camp, as we were as much the victims of the Germans in this question 
as the other 8,395 prisoners of the brick factory. 
 
As I have said the final list of 2,400 people meant for a transport was 
ordered to be prepared on Saturday. We attempted again to get permission 
for the original number of 3,000 but unfortunately in vain. The criteria of 
the selection were already the original: families with lot of children, 
relatives of labour servicemen and prominent figures of Jewish public life. 
 
The question may be raised why the men who made the selection in the brick 
factory of Szeged did not include on the list each relative of the labour 
servicemen from Szeged. First, the limit of 1,200 was not enough if we were 
to consider all three criteria of the selection; second, we could not 
consult any register of all relatives of labour servicemen, and the captain 
did not allow us to make any of our work public, so we could not prepare a 
list of the relatives of labour servicemen, and did not have the time to do 
so anyway. We made up for this deficiency using Frenkels enormous 
knowledge of the families of labour servicemen, since he had given 
ministerial consolation to these people in an exceptional way since 1940 
and personally knew each family. The reason why there were people wrongly 
left off of this list despite this fact should be looked at in the panic 
and chaos that pervaded the camp thanks to the demonic machinations of 
German officers. The three people from Szeged who were responsible for this 
list, especially the popular rabbi Frenkel, were besieged by such a number 
of people that we were hardly able to work and think. 
 
Naturally, as members of the committee we had no idea that the selection 
was a decision between life and death. We did not know either about the 
death camp in Auschwitz, or that our brothers in Szeged were going to be 
transported there, or that the people on the list would be sent to Austria, 
to chiefly benevolent people. There were only some hints of the Germans 
that indicated that the majority of the people in the brick factory would 
either get into a more unpleasant place close to us or into a more pleasant 
place far from us. Concerning the list the Germans gave us the following 
order: "Keine gebrechliche, Kranke, Alte"... and let the people believe 
that the transport would pursue at least a two-week-long trip, which would 
be prolonged also by long walks on foot. This created the false impression 
that those on the list would be indeed directed to Palestine. 
 
As I have said Jewish public figures sent us an inventory of around 160 
names to influence the selection of the prominent ones. Several of these 
came from our area. Now, we already know that more than one of these lists 
was being prepared in Budapest. One of them was prepared with the help of 
Dr Kálmán Balkányi, the former secretary of the National Cultural 
Association of the Hungarian Israelites István Horváth, and Miksa Vértes, 
and it also included some from Szeged, also converts. These contained the 
names of some from Szeged and from the neighbouring countryside, and the 
National Office and the Orthodox Office also suggested a few families. But 
in the attachment to the letter by Ernő Szilágyi, which came to us through 
the headquarters of the Gestapo on Svábhegy, only those names were included 
that passed through the filter of the Hungarian Zionist Association, and by 
the nature of the issue naturally no converts could be enlisted. 
 
To give a full account of this affair I also need to mention the following. 
It was still in May, 1944 that the agile journalist of Kolozsvár, Rezső 
Kasztner managed to liberate 396 people from the claws of the Hungarian 
local administration, more precisely from the brick factory close to 
Kolozsvár and to bring them to Budapest, releasing them from the main 
transport heading for Auschwitz or to other similar places. In their 
interest he also contacted the headquarters of the Gestapo on Svábhegy. He 
managed to find a place for this little group from Kolozsvár in the garden 
of Sir Wechselmans institute for blind people. This camp came to be called 
the camp of Columbus Street. They built more and more huts for the people 
living there. The guards were made up of a few SS soldiers. Kasztner could 
not lead more transports from Transylvanian localities to Budapest, 
therefore he set his mind to save as many Jews as possible of the Alföld 
from deportation. Originally they thought that everyone from the brick 
factory who was on the list would get soon to Erec and this was what they 
agreed with the Germans. This was one of the reasons why the Hungarian 
Zionist Association could not put converts on these kind of lists. Dr 
Kasztner acted everywhere as the representative of the MCSZ, usually 
together with Ottó Komoly, the president of the MCSZ, hence the whole 
issue, the instructions for the preparations belonged to the competence of 
the MCSZ. 
 
At this point I should like to deal with the attitude of the selecting 
committee in the brick factory towards the converts. 
 
As I have said the committee could not discern who were the old converts of 
Szeged in the brick factory. The list prepared by the Jewish religious 
community of Szeged was of no use as the old converts were not members of 
the community, hence, they were not on the list. On the other hand, we knew 
the attitude of Ernő Szilágyi, and of the Hungarian Zionist Association 
that he represented, towards those who did not think and feel themselves 
part of the Jewish community any longer. We knew they could not be offered 
a place in the rescue mission meant for Palestine. Among the converts of 
the brick factory the information was spread that the clergy or the Holy 
Cross Association would effectively represent their interests. As a result 
of this belief all converts moved together in a separate building of the 
brick factory to be easily detectible for a future rescue team. It was 
unthinkable that also non-converts could be involved in such a rescue 
mission. It is then on the most simple basis of reciprocity that even today 
the principles of the committee in charge of the selection cannot be 
contested. Only revengeful busybodies can think the selecting committee 
committed a crime against the people when they did not include people who 
had long ago converted onto the list to the disadvantage of religiously 
active Jews.
 
In spite of all this, as members of the committee we did not have an 
absolutely rigid attitude. Before the times of the brick factory the gossip 
spread among the Jews of Szeged in a psychotic way that young women in 
Slovakia escaped the fate of being victims of the inhumane instincts of 
German soldiers through conversion. As a consequence several families with 
daughters converted in Szeged. This was ignored by the Szeged members of 
the committee. 
 
Meanwhile, Kasztner went on agitating and fighting for the goal to save at 
least minor groups from the hell in Hungary, recognising that trainloads of 
masses could not be transported to Palestine. In theory, Germans gave their 
consent also to this. As a result, minor groups were gathered later in the 
synagogue of Aréna Street (further to the camp in Columbus Street), where 
also a freight car of people from Szeged landed. 
  
This happened in the following way: On that Saturday when the German 
captain gave the order to prepare the final list for the trains, the SS 
captain dictated to me the following 12 names and made us prepare a new 
list: 
From Szeged: Dr Samuel Biedl 13, Rabbi Eugen Frenkel 5, Ábrahám Jungreis 6, 
Dr Leopold Löw 10, Salamon Rosenstock 1, Dr med Lajos Schwartz 2, Michael 
Varga 13, Imre Weisz 4; further from the country, from Hódmezővásárhely: 
Rabbi Dr Adolf Silberstein 3; from Szentes: Rabbi Dr Josef Berend 4; from 
Battonya: Rabbi Pinchas Durchslag; from Csongrád: Rabbi Dr Georg Kalmár. 
These people and their closest relatives were to be put on a separate list. 
 
We noticed that when the captain had given us the order to prepare the list 
for the entrainment he let us see the original instruction; also the fact 
that he failed to give us the official dispatch and did not let us consult 
it either. We were sure that the dispatch listed even more names. A few 
days later, in the camp of Aréna Street the names of those from Szeged were 
read out again and we saw that we had been rightly suspicious. The captain 
had changed the instruction that came from Budapest and deleted some names 
from the list. The two last rabbis on the list had not even got into the 
brick factory of Szeged. The captain did not listen to our request to put 
other worthy rabbis in their place. In Pest it was not possible to know who 
exactly was here. It is interesting how unpredictably masses can react to 
certain happenings. Many of Szeged resented that their Frenkel did not 
accompany them till Strasshof, while those of Makó resented that their 
popular rabbi Ármin Kecskeméti did stay with them and as a result did not 
get to Budapest. 
 
It gave us another headache and a reason to dispute who to include in the 
list as relatives, and where the people on this freight car-list would end 
up. Were they going to be saved or would they become hostages? However, 
knowing how much it mattered to people to stay together with members of the 
family we decided to take the German instruction in its possible broadest 
sense, thereby the 10 original names grew to 61 at the end. 
 
On Monday evening, the captain took a woman to the window of our office 
instructing us to put her and her family on the car-list. Dr Ignác Vas and 
his family got on the list this way. The selection could not include all 
relatives and friends of the given persons because it could have generated 
resentment among those who were not included in the list. Since time was 
short, the number of people in the camp was high, and the committee was 
busy at work we did not have the opportunity to make public the criteria of 
the selection given us by the Germans. This constrained silence gave then 
the reason for the blind hatred towards the selecting committee from the 
part of those uninformed, overly critical ones. 
 
 
The 24th of June, the sad march of the first transport started towards the 
railway station of Rókus. 
 
It is the third day that the gloomy groups of the deported densely one 
after the other are trudging towards the station of Rókus all day long. It 
is one of the hottest June afternoons. Incitors of gendarmes! What has 
happened? A good woman threw cherries to some children she knew on the side 
of the road. This gesture of philanthropy calls for the coarseness of the 
gendarmes. Have they perhaps never seen the placard "Do not curse!"? 
 
Alongside the crawling people a wagon was pulled by a horse loaded up till 
the sky with the last belongings of the deported. Around the belongings the 
sick and the old were sitting. 
 
But what? These rascals have made an exception to someone, who sits on a 
chair on the wagon. And suffers everything in silence. He cannot see the 
people next to him. God blessed him and took away his sight. This is indeed 
a blessing of God that he cannot see what his sheep have to go through, 
what happened to his temple, how they shoved the decorated pews out of the 
temple and piled them up in the open exposing them to sunshine and rain, 
how they tread on and extirpated the trees and bushes of his park. 
 
And now 66 of them are marching towards the freight car, as many as the 
number of years he had spread the word of God explaining the Scripture, 
always in the same place, opposite the house where his cradle once had 
rocked. In this eventful life of rich experiences, he never travelled in a 
railcar of cows. Thanks to the city where he was born, and which he made 
world famous, now he could experience also that. And there is the killer, 
the bacterium in his lung that he gathered in the Dantesque hell of the 
drying oven of the brick factory and that would take his life three weeks 
later. Not even the news of his death was reported in a national journal. 
The free press of the times did not report that he was tortured, made to 
suffer, because they wanted to humiliate one of the greatest sons of the 
city. He is now on the slopes of the Jewish cemetery of Buda in eternal 
sleep. Air-raid alarms made up for the cries of his followers spread around 
in the distance. The sounds of the clods of dirt thrown upon his coffin 
were echoed by the explosion of the bombs. 

 
A bug-eaten foil of paper with one of his orations: this is what fortune 
has saved from the horrible devastation in which most of his writings got 
destroyed, which is an irreparable damage to Hungarian science and 
literature too. Here he addressed his followers with the following words in 
the last years of his life: 
"Solace has escaped my eyes", this is how we read today the word of the 
prophets. There is no consolation for the sad state of our country. 
 
The rescue work of our despair exhausts in squeezing newer and newer tax 
sacrifices. As if one could expect the dry marc without its grape juice put 
back under the press to bring a ripe harvest the second time, or as if the 
mean toftman could squeeze honey from the empty honeycomb. Our public state 
is a miserable common fasting. The only hope that remained for this common 
fasting is that we cry to God as at dawn of all fasts: "Listen to our 
crying words so that once our grateful heart can say Blessed is the mercy 
of God who took pity on the country. 
 
The first two transports left on the 24th and the 27th; each had 3,000 
people. The unfortunate victims had to carry their belongings themselves to 
the station. Only the sick could put their baggage on wagons and get on the 
car themselves. At the station the guarding gendarmes basically stole 
everything, claiming they needed to cram as many people as possible on the 
freight cars. The chief officers of the railway station counted the hunted 
people at the gate. When people got on they locked both doors of the car. 
Naturally, they forgot to give water or food. For example, the second 
transport of people stayed locked without food or drink for six days when 
countrywide it was terribly hot. I do not know how many died out of the 15-
20 seriously sick unfortunates. 
 
The gendarmes carried back the belongings robbed from the entrained people 
to the brick factory. On the road, they generously gave from these things 
to the scum of the street. The following detail is revealing on what was 
collected in the brick factory: experts estimated only the value of feather 
from the pillows and bedclothes at 150,000 pengős, which was taken away 
from the 6,000 men and women of the first two transports.  
 
Apart from the Jews of Szeged primarily the Jews scattered around in the 
neighbouring towns and villages were gathered in the brick factory: from 
Makó, Hódmezővásárhely, Mindszent, Kistelek, Dunapataj, Kiszombor, 
Csanádpalota, Pitvaros, Magyarcsanád, Földeák, and Újkécske. But what was 
left in the brick factory! Who is responsible for the ruthlessness of the 
entrainment and for the brutality of the travel? Why did no officer or 
employee of the Hungarian State Railways (MÁV) apply the rule that concerns 
the transport of animals regarding the provision of food and drink to the 
case of these unfortunate pariahs? They think they cant be held 
responsible. 
 
The 28th of June, the gendarme lieutenant who directed the entrainment let 
the entrained people suffer from thirst from the morning till 3 pm when 
finally the German sergeant of the Gestapo (on the warning of others) 
benevolently intervened. 
 
According to the current view, Jews were not part of the nation, but their 
property was a national possession. This was claimed in the decree of the 
authorities, which took its roots in the propaganda against the Jews. 
Despite this fact, the superficial, light-headed authorities of Szeged, 
concentrating only on torturing the Jews did not worry about protecting the 
ownerless Jewish possessions, especially the contents of the houses. Most 
of them went to ruin on the courtyards of the Jewish temples. Authorities 
did not provide for their protection but tolerated that the mob robbed what 
the army passing through had left for them. This way it was indeed national 
possession that perished with the knowledge and consent of the authorities. 
Who is responsible for this? 
 
Monday afternoon, the final list of the 2,400 had to be read on order of 
the Germans to the inhabitants of the camp who were forced again to queue 
up. Thereafter, still in the evening the Germans instructed the listed 
people to occupy the left wing of the factory and the rest to occupy the 
right wing. This latter group was entrained the day after, on Tuesday, and 
was directed first towards Szajol, and finally to Strasshof, where also the 
train of the enlisted arrived. Almost all the sick people of the hospital 
of the brick factory, ca. 250, joined this Tuesday transport. Amongst them 
were the most unfortunate of the camp, whom the madness of the Germans 
drove into the brick factory from psychiatric institutes. As was promised 
the people on the list of 2,400 were counted. The selection was successful, 
we did not exceed the narrow limit. Still Monday evening, after the list 
was made public the upset mess invaded our office. The captain took out his 
pistol to command order. It was in vain. We wanted to use his presence to 
convince him to increase the narrow limit and accept another 100 people on 
the list. The captain remained adamant. 
 
Naturally, in the brick factory we had no idea about the existence of 
Auschwitz, even less about the fact that the first transport was directed 
there. To accuse the members of our committee that we knew about the horror 
that was going on and that we used our influence to consciously send there 
people we disliked is an accusation as harsh as the one in the case of 
Tiszaeszlár. 
 
It is similarly false to accuse us of putting certain people on the list 
for money. If they proved only one case any member of the committee would 
offer himself for the well-deserved gallows. 
 
Preparing the list we ran against German instructions twice only to help 
the sick and the frail to get on the train. In the case of poor Dr Rex. 
Saturday evening the news started to spread about the death of Dr Rex. 
Later, he regained his consciousness but his medical colleagues did not 
think he could stay alive longer than 1-2 days. We did not want this 
outstanding person and good friend not to be buried in Szeged but left 
somewhere dead along the railway lines. His wife and son were anyway on the 
list so he was put on the car as an extra. We added the president of our 
chevra Lajos Faragó, and his severely sick elder sister, too. The secret 
plan was to join them to the numbers of the special freight car. The 
aforementioned benevolent German sergeant, who accompanied the special 
freight car to Budapest, seemed liable to allow us to do so but on Rókus 
station he did not let them get on. On the railway station of Ferencváros, 
where he had the special freight car emptied we started to plead and beg 
him to let us snatch these deadly sick people and transport them to a 
hospital of Budapest but he changed his mind and rigidly refrained. This is 
how these unfortunate people ended up in Strasshof. 
 
I mention here that university professors Béla Purjes and István Rusznyák  
the latter had converted together with his family years before  were 
entrained the 27th of June and taken away with the second transport in spite 
of their privileged status. At daybreak the chief captain of the Gestapo of 
Szeged appeared in their flat, allowed them 10 minutes to pack and drove 
them by car to the brick factory, let them stay in line with the rest of 
the queued up people and made them march with the others to the station of 
Rókus. When this transport arrived at Strasshof (initially it was heading 
towards Auschwitz but was redirected) the instruction was waiting for them 
on the station ordering the five of them to turn back to Budapest, where 
for a few days they were kept in the camp of Columbus Street. I wanted to 
point out here that there were cases when people were taken home even from 
so far away. 
 
Lets theoretically suppose that we did not obey an order given to us, what 
else could we do? Did we not select 1,200 Jews out of the 4,200 Jews of 
Szeged? Either this or that. Either we obeyed a supposed order or we did 
not. The only difference is that now not "A" but "B" would be among those 
who are crying guilty!. 
 
To tell precisely how many people we selected because of one criterion and 
how many because of another one may be possible only if we still had the 
list and we could reconstruct why each of the 1,200 of Szeged was enlisted. 
But where would it lead to? It is anyway obvious that in those 
circumstances and having the possible greatest compassion the results were 
still far from satisfying. And did we not face the same death during the 
whole year? There was the horror of Gössling! What difference was there 
between brothers dying all there? Did it matter that there were among them 
people from the prominent group, Israelites from the list and old 
converts who were not on the list? How much time we would give of our own 
life if these poor brothers could still be with us! 
 
Further to the group of Szeged, people arrived in Aréna Road and Columbus 
Street from Debrecen, Pápa, Szombathely, Sopron, Kaposvár, Sárvár, 
Félegyháza, Csaba, Bácsalmás, and some families from the communities of the 
brick factory of Budakalász. Except for the large group coming from 
Kolozsvár there was no town from where so many people came to the camp as 
from Szeged. Out of the 66 from Szeged, 12 went to Switzerland through 
Bergen-Belsen, out of the 54 that remained there 13 died or disappeared, 
that is, 24 percent. 
 
The camp on Columbus Street was originally an SS-guarded internment camp. 
In September 1944, the SS-guards left the camp in half an hour. We stayed 
on our own for three weeks and lived like other inhabitants of starred 
houses. Between 11 am and 3 pm we walked freely in the streets. 
 
The era of Szálasi started October the 16th, when families of Pest and 
labour servicemen came flooding into the camp and attracted the attention 
of the Arrow Cross. 
 
The 3rd of December, my family and I were taken to the ghetto of Pest where 
the 5th of December I was made head of the district. We stayed only a few 
days there, then we moved to the Swedish protected house on Pannonia 
Street. We stayed there till the 24th of January, 1945. After the capture of 
Budapest I returned to Szeged with my family. 
 
My plan for the future is to move to Palestine with my wife and two sons as 
soon as possible.
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="right_menu">
     <div id="right_menu_content">
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main_hu" href="index.php?showarticle=2031">
        The Holocaust in Hungary
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_1')">
        Perpetrators
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_1">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2011">
          The Gendarmerie
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2012">
          The Police
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2013">
          The Public Administration
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_2')">
        The Gentile Population
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_2">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2014">
          Indifference, Antipathy, Antisemitism
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2015">
          Hungarian Rescuers
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_12')">
        Regions of Destruction
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_12">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2016">
          The Capital: Budapest
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2033">
          A City in the Countryside: Balassagyarmat
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2034">
          A Village: Rákosszentmihály
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_4')">
        Women
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_4">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2017">
          Hungarian Jewish Women in the Kanadakommando
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2018">
          SS Female Overseers in Auschwitz
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2019">
        The First Massacre
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2020">
        Antisemitism
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2021">
        The Jewish Council
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2022">
        Resistance, Zionists
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_9')">
        Death Factory - Auschwitz-Birkenau 1944
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_9">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2023">
          Prisoners' Fate in Auschwitz-Birkenau
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2024">
          SS physicians
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2025">
          What did the Victims know?
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_10')">
        Rescue
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_10">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2026">
          Decent Gendarmes
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2027">
          Policemen
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2028">
          Humane Officials
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2029">
          The Military
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2030">
        Looting
       </a>
      </div>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2032">
       Labour Service
      </a>
      <script>
       toc('menu_12');toc('menu_12');
				if (current!=null) toc(current);
      </script>
     </div>
    </div>
   </div>
   <div id="footer">
   </div>
   <a href="http://degob.hu/index.php" style="text-decoration:none;" title="magyar">
    <div id="switch_banner" title="switch to Hungarian">
     váltás magyarra
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="bphm_banner">
    <a href="http://bphm.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="bphm.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/BPHM_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#1d3c51;font-size:9px;">
      bphm.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <div id="holomo_banner">
    <a href="http://www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/holo_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#5b4b32;font-size:9px;">
      holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <a href="index.php">
    <div id="home">
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="scroller">
    <object align="middle" classid="clsid:d27cdb6e-ae6d-11cf-96b8-444553540000" codebase="http://fpdownload.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=8,0,0,0" height="18" id="scroller" width="927">
     <param name="allowScriptAccess" value="sameDomain"/>
     <param name="movie" value="scroller_en.swf"/>
     <param name="quality" value="high"/>
     <param name="wmode" value="transparent"/>
     <param name="bgcolor" value="#000000"/>
     <embed align="middle" allowscriptaccess="sameDomain" bgcolor="#000000" height="18" name="scroller" pluginspage="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" quality="high" src="scroller_en.swf" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="927" wmode="transparent"/>
    </object>
   </div>
  </div>
  <script src="http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js" type="text/javascript">
  </script>
  <script type="text/javascript">
   _uacct = "UA-316143-2";
urchinTracker();
  </script>
 </body>
</html>
