<html>
 <head>
  <title>
   degob.org
  </title>
  <link href="degob.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
  <script language="JavaScript">
   <!-- Hide the script from old browsers --

	var current;

	function toc(toc_id) {

		toc_element = document.getElementById(toc_id);

		if ((toc_element.style.display=='none')||(toc_element.style.display=='')) {
			toc_element.style.display='block';
		}
		else {
			toc_element.style.display='none';
		}
	}


    // --end hiding here -->
  </script>
 </head>
 <body>
  <div id="wrapper">
   <div id="header">
   </div>
   <div id="main_wrapper">
    <div id="left_menu">
     <div id="left_menu_content">
      <a class="menu_main" href="?extsearch">
       Search
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php">
       Main page
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=203">
       On DEGOB
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2049">
       The Survivor Witnesses
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="?glossary">
       Glossary
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Encylopedia of Camps
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Supporters
      </a>
      <br/>
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="content_container">
     <div id="content">
      <div>
       <div style="float:left;display:inline">
        <h1 style="display:inline">
         Protocol Nr. 3623
        </h1>
       </div>
       <a href="?showjk_img=3623" style="text-decoration:none; color:#453c2d; ">
        <span style="vertical-align:middle; cursor:pointer; float:right; font-size:11px; width:126px; height:17px;  background-image:url('http://degob.hu/images/arrow_l.jpg'); background-repeat:no-repeat; color:#453c2d; font-weight:bold;">
         <span style="padding-left:30px;">
          scanned image
         </span>
        </span>
       </a>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both; margin-bottom:25px;">
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         dr. G. F.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         male
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Zagyvapálfalva
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1884
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Budapest
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         head physician of the Bródy hospital
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
      </div>
      <br/>
      <br/>
      The person in question has given us the following information:

The 30th of October, 1944, I became the Director of the Jewish hospital on 
Wesselényi Street. During these days there was only this hospital with a sister 
institute in Akácfa Street No. 30. Later, all Jewish hospitals in Budapest 
belonged to the management of this hospital, in contrast to earlier times when 
all were individually directed. All Jewish hospitals belonged to a head office 
that functioned as a part of the Jewish Council. Since we only had 240 beds in 
the hospital on Wesselényi Street, while the number of patients rose much higher 
than 240, to 1,200, we had to open sister institutes inside the ghetto, which 
were the following:
Wesselény Street No. 31, 35, 37;
Akácfa Street No. 18-20, 22 (rest home), 30 and 38;
Klauzál Square No. 9. 
and 13 other sister hospitals.

The number of hospitals in the ghetto was 22. These sister institutes in the 
ghetto were established in the following way. When the number of patients in the 
central hospital reached 1,200, while we had only 240 places, and all basements, 
corridors and staircases were full of patients, the Council allowed us to use a 
flat in the ghetto. We grouped furniture in a room and transformed the flat or 
most often flats rapidly into a hospital. Naturally, the sick took their own 
belongings, we only provided them doctors, nurses and medicine. In each of these 
sister hospitals there were 6-8 doctors, while in the central hospital there 
were 31 doctors. We were told that a doctor could have 30 patients. As only the 
central hospital had an operating room and an X-Ray laboratory, we needed to 
gather all patients with surgical problems here.

There were hospitals also outside the ghetto: the Weiss Alice Maternity Home; 
the Bíró Dániel Hospital and Rest House on Maros Street in Buda; further, some 
emergency hospitals On Szabolcs Street, at 2 Bethlen Square, 14 Rákóczi Street, 
and 26 Erzsébet Ring.

It was under Arrow Cross rule that our hospital became indispensable to the Jews 
and in the life of the people obliged to wear yellow stars. Public and private 
hospitals could not accept starred patients, and had to send away also those 
who were already admitted. We had the only surgical department with an X-Ray 
device and there was only in Weiss Alice hospital another obstetrics ward.

As a result, all patients with surgical problems and most women giving birth 
were brought here, and we had to accept them whatever number of free places we 
had.

Nurses and doctors had difficulties to work and exist under these extremely 
overcrowded conditions. It necessitated great dedication and self-sacrifice in 
treatment and healing. At the same time there was not even a nook where they 
could get some rest on their own. Nurses and orderlies slept on the floor of 
corridors in the cold, in narrow places between patients. They were hungry but 
kept on working. Most of the doctors also had to stay out of the doctors room; 
they found a place for sleeping mostly in the operating room full of pus. Night 
work was frequent because there was a continuous flow of people after suicide 
attempts, with severe injuries or in mortally exhausted conditions. 

The number of people who fought for hospital treatment sharply rose when some 
new measures or rules were taken, and there were of course also healthy people 
among them. We had to offer them a place, although registration was severely 
regulated. At the beginning we could accept men younger than 60, later 50, and 
women younger than 40 only if they could produce a certificate of their 
demobilization or on the opinion of a military doctor. Naturally, we could not 
keep to this rule and needed to accept patients also younger than the indicated 
age limits.

It became more and more dangerous to go out. Consequently, many of the 
hospitals medical staff could not come to work and only those who lived in the 
hospital remained in service. 

Already on the morning of the 16th of October, Arrow Cross mobs invaded the 
hospital. They forced the staff, the senior doctor and Director and all doctors 
to stand with their backs to the wall. They wanted to take away the Director as 
they thought the hospitals staff was too numerous.

Each day meant a new flood of people. For example, the 23rd of October, when 
they marched to the grounds of the National Centre for High School Sports Clubs, 
or another time when people moved into protected houses, masses of people were 
brought in after suicide attempts. We registered 260 suicidal people only in the 
central hospital, out of whom 100 died. But we also sent great numbers of 
patients (people after suicide attempts) to sister institutes when we had no 
more places.

There were around 200 labour servicemen in the hospital. 50 did their labour 
service officially, with the permission of the Army, while 150 came here in 
hiding. We used them as couriers, as guards of the gate, etc.

Once, the total number of patients  together with the hospitals in the ghetto  
reached 7,500. This high number was the consequence of the fact that a great 
portion of the people brought back from the brick factory or Hegyeshalom was 
sick. It was the only way to find a place for these unfortunate hundreds who 
were brought back from the brick factory or from Hegyeshalom by the Swedish or 
the Swiss Embassy or the International Red Cross. These people again, close to 
death, came back in a bad physical state, often with injuries that later caused 
their death. Frequently, only an amputation of their legs could save their 
lives. They were also in need of an emergency hospital.

People believed that hospitals offered greater security than flats since 
everyone was convinced that the Arrow Cross would respect the sick than the 
healthy more. This belief unfortunately proved to be false in several cases, 
like the sad cases of the two Jewish hospitals in Buda where patients were 
massacred.

The 16th of October, a Dutch citizen, an English teacher named Armand Bowenher, 
was so badly beaten that on the 9th of November he died with symptoms of 
paralysis. He was not a Jew but he appeared to them as one, and they did not 
care about his explanations.

The 3rd of December, the Arrow Cross invaded the camp on Columbus Street, where 
those who wanted to emigrate to Palestine gathered. The people who got injured 
during this attack were brought to us. 

Several patients were brought to us who had been most brutally assaulted by the 
Arrow Cross. Many others came with burns. These burns were caused by newspaper 
that they had pushed between the victims toes before they had lit them. There 
was more than one of these cases.

In several cases policemen also brought us injured people, people they had shot 
in front of the building. There was a huge man with an athletes body who had 
received 5-6 shots. When they brought him in, he still made a few steps in the 
corridor before he died there.

People with bullets in the back of the neck came also from Svábhegy, among 
others a woman who had been violated by five Arrow Cross men. She left the 
hospital healthy.

The 31st of December, the Arrow Cross attacked the Swiss Embassy in Vadász 
Street No. 29. They also brought us some injured people that time, among others 
the wife of Rabbi Scheiber, who died later of her injuries.

The 9th of January, people who had escaped from the bank of the Danube were 
brought to us. They chased 14 naked Jewish patients of the Charité Clinic to the 
Danube  no matter how sick they were  and shot them into the water. The only 
survivor Zsuzsa Kollmann got away without injuries because she jumped in before 
they could shoot her. Her mother died there. Although she cried for help, the 
daughter could not help her as the water took her away. 

The 12th of January, the Arrow Cross went into the ghetto and killed most of the 
people gathered in the air raid shelter of 27 Wesselényi Street. There number 
was 46, out of whom 6 injured were brought to us.

There was a great number of shot people brought to us from the group that dug 
trenches, people who got shot on the way. There were also several of them with 
bullets in the back of the neck.

Many died because they either did not let the sick see a doctor at all or only 
too late. Patients with strangulated hernia or perforation in the stomach were 
operated only 2-3 days later than was due. We got a patient already in the phase 
of agony with necrotising fascitis.

Naturally, we accepted first of all injured people. I remember a day when they 
brought us 50 people in an hour, out of whom 11 died before we could have 
operated on them. These were Jews from the ghetto, the victims of a bomb. Until 
the 17th of January, we treated around 300 people who had been injured by the 
Arrow Cross; around 50 of them died. These had been all shot, and none of them 
came from the ghetto but from different parts of the city, 15 of them, for 
example, from Liszt Ferenc Square.

One of the employees of the hospital named Mór Steiner was fitting a window of 
the basement, staying on the street side of the window in the hours when Jews 
were not allowed to go out. They took him away, and 3-4 days later threw his 
body in front of the hospital.

The guard of the gate, Tibor Schwartz, who was a labour serviceman, was taken 
away from the gate of the hospital, and killed on the way on Barcsay Street.

Another labour serviceman, Zoltán Schäfer, was also found dead on Andrássy Road, 
shot by an Arrow Cross man. This very courageous, fearless person had left in 
order to get hold of medicine that was urgently needed in the hospital, but he 
never returned.

We lived in constant terror. They knew it was a Jewish hospital although we had 
received protection from the International Red Cross in the meantime. 
Notwithstanding, they kept threatening us and invading our premises. The 15th of 
January, I got the order to gather half of the medical staff and patients and 
bring them to 60 Andrássy Road "for an identity check." We knew it meant death 
for these people. We already had some injured patients from the Arrow Cross, 
from the gendarmerie and the Army as the frontline was somewhere around the 
Erzsébet Ring, and they could not bring the injured elsewhere. Rókus Hospital 
did not function any more. For our luck, there was a very heavy air attack that 
day. I got the injured Arrow Cross men and the only injured SS man brought down 
and started to change their bandages in front of the Arrow Cross men who were 
invading the hospital. These Arrow Cross patients started to beg them for mercy 
and told them that we had treated them as if they had been our fathers. A 2nd 
lieutenant from the Prónay squad called Surányi, who had looked for asylum in 
the hospital although he was not injured, gave us also valuable support in 
thwarting their attack. He beseeched them and when it did not help he threatened 
to shoot them. Several of the doctors declared that they would not let 
themselves be dragged away. It happened already after they had attacked the 
hospitals in Buda. They apparently wanted to systematically destroy hospitals.

The most critical were the last two days. We already knew about the tragic 
events in Buda, and expected the same every minute. As I have said, they did not 
forget about us either.

There was a Hungarian cannon in front of the hospital and we made friends with 
the 11 soldiers who staffed it. We managed to win them over and they promised to 
defend us in case the Arrow Cross would attack us. One or two of them stayed at 
our gate, while the rest in the opposite building. We agreed that we were going 
to shout for help in case we got attacked, and they would protect us.

This is how the day of liberation arrived! Mortality was immense also during 
these days, especially among babies and the elderly. They could not withstand 
food shortage and cold, and we could not help them. We could not find milk for 
babies. The food we had was exclusively made up of beans and peas. Most patients 
with diarrhoea passed away because of a lack of appropriate food. After 
liberation, on a single day we carried 180 corpses out of Wesselényi Hospital. 
Weeks later, this high mortality rate still persisted. We had no material for 
heating, while all windows were broken, which contributed to the death of 
people, in particular to the death of the elderly.

In sister institutes conditions were the same, except that starvation was 
greater, sanitation was much worse, hence, the mortality rate was even higher.

In May, the hospitals were dissolved, first sister hospitals, and finally the 
central one.
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="right_menu">
     <div id="right_menu_content">
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main_hu" href="index.php?showarticle=2031">
        The Holocaust in Hungary
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_1')">
        Perpetrators
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_1">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2011">
          The Gendarmerie
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2012">
          The Police
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2013">
          The Public Administration
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_2')">
        The Gentile Population
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_2">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2014">
          Indifference, Antipathy, Antisemitism
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2015">
          Hungarian Rescuers
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_12')">
        Regions of Destruction
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_12">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2016">
          The Capital: Budapest
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2033">
          A City in the Countryside: Balassagyarmat
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2034">
          A Village: Rákosszentmihály
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_4')">
        Women
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_4">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2017">
          Hungarian Jewish Women in the Kanadakommando
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2018">
          SS Female Overseers in Auschwitz
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2019">
        The First Massacre
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2020">
        Antisemitism
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2021">
        The Jewish Council
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2022">
        Resistance, Zionists
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_9')">
        Death Factory - Auschwitz-Birkenau 1944
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_9">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2023">
          Prisoners' Fate in Auschwitz-Birkenau
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2024">
          SS physicians
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2025">
          What did the Victims know?
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_10')">
        Rescue
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_10">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2026">
          Decent Gendarmes
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2027">
          Policemen
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2028">
          Humane Officials
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2029">
          The Military
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2030">
        Looting
       </a>
      </div>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2032">
       Labour Service
      </a>
      <script>
       toc('menu_12');toc('menu_12');
				if (current!=null) toc(current);
      </script>
     </div>
    </div>
   </div>
   <div id="footer">
   </div>
   <a href="http://degob.hu/index.php" style="text-decoration:none;" title="magyar">
    <div id="switch_banner" title="switch to Hungarian">
     váltás magyarra
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="bphm_banner">
    <a href="http://bphm.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="bphm.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/BPHM_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#1d3c51;font-size:9px;">
      bphm.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <div id="holomo_banner">
    <a href="http://www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/holo_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#5b4b32;font-size:9px;">
      holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <a href="index.php">
    <div id="home">
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="scroller">
    <object align="middle" classid="clsid:d27cdb6e-ae6d-11cf-96b8-444553540000" codebase="http://fpdownload.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=8,0,0,0" height="18" id="scroller" width="927">
     <param name="allowScriptAccess" value="sameDomain"/>
     <param name="movie" value="scroller_en.swf"/>
     <param name="quality" value="high"/>
     <param name="wmode" value="transparent"/>
     <param name="bgcolor" value="#000000"/>
     <embed align="middle" allowscriptaccess="sameDomain" bgcolor="#000000" height="18" name="scroller" pluginspage="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" quality="high" src="scroller_en.swf" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="927" wmode="transparent"/>
    </object>
   </div>
  </div>
  <script src="http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js" type="text/javascript">
  </script>
  <script type="text/javascript">
   _uacct = "UA-316143-2";
urchinTracker();
  </script>
 </body>
</html>
