<html>
 <head>
  <title>
   degob.org
  </title>
  <link href="degob.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
  <script language="JavaScript">
   <!-- Hide the script from old browsers --

	var current;

	function toc(toc_id) {

		toc_element = document.getElementById(toc_id);

		if ((toc_element.style.display=='none')||(toc_element.style.display=='')) {
			toc_element.style.display='block';
		}
		else {
			toc_element.style.display='none';
		}
	}


    // --end hiding here -->
  </script>
 </head>
 <body>
  <div id="wrapper">
   <div id="header">
   </div>
   <div id="main_wrapper">
    <div id="left_menu">
     <div id="left_menu_content">
      <a class="menu_main" href="?extsearch">
       Search
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php">
       Main page
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=203">
       On DEGOB
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2049">
       The Survivor Witnesses
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="?glossary">
       Glossary
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Encylopedia of Camps
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Supporters
      </a>
      <br/>
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="content_container">
     <div id="content">
      <div>
       <div style="float:left;display:inline">
        <h1 style="display:inline">
         Protocol Nr. 2631
        </h1>
       </div>
       <a href="?showjk_img=2631" style="text-decoration:none; color:#453c2d; ">
        <span style="vertical-align:middle; cursor:pointer; float:right; font-size:11px; width:126px; height:17px;  background-image:url('http://degob.hu/images/arrow_l.jpg'); background-repeat:no-repeat; color:#453c2d; font-weight:bold;">
         <span style="padding-left:30px;">
          scanned image
         </span>
        </span>
       </a>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both; margin-bottom:25px;">
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         K. A.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         male
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Nagykároly
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1907
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Budapest
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         weaver
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Concentration
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         labour service company 101/304
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Camps
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Mauthausen, Günskirhcen
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         F. S.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         male
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Máramarossziget
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1889
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Budapest
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         merchant
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Concentration
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         yellow star house
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Camps
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Mauthausen, Günskirhcen
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
      </div>
      <br/>
      <br/>
      The persons named above have given us the following information:

(K. Adolf:) Jewish laws concerned me only in as much as I did labour service 
several times. First, in 1940 for 30 days, later in 1942, for 90 days in 
Bécstopolya. Next time I was drafted for service in Jászberény the 6th of June, 
1944, obeying the call of the placards. From here we went to Mórpuszta, where we 
had a supportable life. Later, I was taken to Budapest and was entrained on the 
27th of November at Józsefváros railway station. There were 92 of us locked in 
the freight car so that we could not escape. We were transported to Fert?rákos 
through Hegyeshalom. We remained in Fert?rákos 10 days in very poor conditions. 
Next, they transported us to Balf, where we dug trenches till March the 27th. 


(K. Adolf:) Jewish laws concerned me only in as much as I did labour service 
several times. First, in 1940 for 30 days, later in 1942, for 90 days in 
Bécstopolya. Next time I was drafted for service in Jászberény the 6th of June, 
1944, obeying the call of the placards. From here we went to Mórpuszta, where we 
had a supportable life. Later, I was taken to Budapest and was entrained on the 
27th of November at Józsefváros railway station. There were 92 of us locked in 
the freight car so that we could not escape. We were transported to Fert?rákos 
through Hegyeshalom. We remained in Fert?rákos 10 days in very poor conditions. 
Next, they transported us to Balf, where we dug trenches till March the 27th. 
During this period we suffered a lot from beatings, battering, torturing, and 
several times innocent people were shot. What added to our suffering was that we 
got lice here. The Arrow Cross robbed us several times and took what they liked 
regardless how much we were in need of that particular object. They seized our 
watches, rings, money, better clothes, toiletries, everything they desired.

(F. Salamon) We started to experience the effect of Jewish laws in 
Máramarossziget, when Hungarians entered the country in 1940 and seized shops, 
withdrew trade licences, etc. From this moment on, we lived quite badly. People 
in the area were very antisemitic. One day I hosted a Polish refugee, therefore 
I also had to escape from home. I came to Budapest where I lived in illegality. 
When Germans entered the country in 1944, I also started to wear a yellow star, 
I lived in a starred house; leaving the house was restricted. One day, the Arrow 
Cross came to collect the inhabitants and they took us to Józsefváros railway 
station, from where we went to Fert?rákos. During our stay we dug trenches and 
experienced maltreatment. Food was so scarce that we were continuously hungry. 
In freezing cold we had an incredible cold so we could not decide what made us 
suffer more. We had to queue up in lines of four people in snow and puddles with 
frozen feet and hands and were not allowed to run to warm up a little. When 
later we entered the barn where we were lodged we lay down wet as we were. It is 
no surprise that a great number of people got sick and died. Sick people were 
simply shot; there was no more trouble with them. I went to work continuously 
till Easter however difficult the work was. I did not dare to stay home as it 
would have meant sure death for me.

At the end of March, we were transported to Mauthausen. We walked for a while on 
foot before we were entrained. During the trip they did not give us food and 
shot many of my comrades. Only when crossing Loretto they killed several 
hundreds of people in the most ruthless, most inhuman way. We walked in groups 
of 5,000. They rushed us and beat us all the way while we were hungry and 
thirsty. We were forced to eat some grass and rape.

When we arrived in Mauthausen we had to stay in the court, lying for days in mud 
and dirt. It was not much better in the tents we entered later. Food was already 
so scarce here that it is hard to describe it. The daily 2-3 decilitres of 
turnip soup and 100 grams of bread were not enough to sustain even the inactive 
life we had. Starvation was made worse by the carnage we experienced, the 
killing and shooting, and by typhus fever that started here. Around 120-150 
people died daily. We imagined hell a better place than the camp in Mauthausen.

Around the 20th of April, the camp of Mauthausen was emptied and we had to start 
a ca. 60-kilometre walk without any food. We were in groups of 5,000. We had 
never experienced a trip more horrible than that. Ruthless SS leaders shot these 
exhausted, tortured people in the minute they stooped down to collect some 
grass, rape or a snail or if they could not resist fatigue and stopped for a few 
minutes. Several hundreds of our comrades passed away during this trip, people 
who could have carried on after a short rest.

Three days later, we arrived in Gunskirchen into the fatal forest. Here they put 
us up in wooden barracks. If we believed that life could not be worse than in 
Mauthausen, we had to realise now that we had been wrong. One cannot imagine the 
life we had there. Hundreds of starving, enfeebled people died all the time as 
they were fed by 2-3 decilitres of turnip soup and 10 grams of bread. Death is 
indescribable here. The only energy that remained in the innumerable bodies 
shrivelled to skeletons served to move their hands or feet by force. Next to 
these bodies naked dead bodies lay on one another, they lay for days in the 
courtyard, in the barrack, next to the latrine before they were carried away.

We badly lacked water here both for drinking and for washing, particularly as 
thousands of lice covered our bodies already. The latrine is a separate chapter 
of the story. The great number of people with diarrhoea had to queue up and wait 
here for hours. If the queue was not straight enough or someone could not wait 
his turn he or she got shot by watchful SS guards. Although not much was needed 
to be shot since the SS was shooting just for fun.

This was our life when the Americans liberated us the 4th of May, 1945. 
Afterwards we had a good life.

These were our own experiences.
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="right_menu">
     <div id="right_menu_content">
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main_hu" href="index.php?showarticle=2031">
        The Holocaust in Hungary
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_1')">
        Perpetrators
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_1">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2011">
          The Gendarmerie
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2012">
          The Police
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2013">
          The Public Administration
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_2')">
        The Gentile Population
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_2">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2014">
          Indifference, Antipathy, Antisemitism
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2015">
          Hungarian Rescuers
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_12')">
        Regions of Destruction
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_12">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2016">
          The Capital: Budapest
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2033">
          A City in the Countryside: Balassagyarmat
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2034">
          A Village: Rákosszentmihály
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_4')">
        Women
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_4">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2017">
          Hungarian Jewish Women in the Kanadakommando
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2018">
          SS Female Overseers in Auschwitz
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2019">
        The First Massacre
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2020">
        Antisemitism
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2021">
        The Jewish Council
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2022">
        Resistance, Zionists
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_9')">
        Death Factory - Auschwitz-Birkenau 1944
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_9">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2023">
          Prisoners' Fate in Auschwitz-Birkenau
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2024">
          SS physicians
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2025">
          What did the Victims know?
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_10')">
        Rescue
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_10">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2026">
          Decent Gendarmes
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2027">
          Policemen
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2028">
          Humane Officials
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2029">
          The Military
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2030">
        Looting
       </a>
      </div>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2032">
       Labour Service
      </a>
      <script>
       toc('menu_12');toc('menu_12');
				if (current!=null) toc(current);
      </script>
     </div>
    </div>
   </div>
   <div id="footer">
   </div>
   <a href="http://degob.hu/index.php" style="text-decoration:none;" title="magyar">
    <div id="switch_banner" title="switch to Hungarian">
     váltás magyarra
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="bphm_banner">
    <a href="http://bphm.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="bphm.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/BPHM_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#1d3c51;font-size:9px;">
      bphm.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <div id="holomo_banner">
    <a href="http://www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/holo_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#5b4b32;font-size:9px;">
      holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <a href="index.php">
    <div id="home">
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="scroller">
    <object align="middle" classid="clsid:d27cdb6e-ae6d-11cf-96b8-444553540000" codebase="http://fpdownload.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=8,0,0,0" height="18" id="scroller" width="927">
     <param name="allowScriptAccess" value="sameDomain"/>
     <param name="movie" value="scroller_en.swf"/>
     <param name="quality" value="high"/>
     <param name="wmode" value="transparent"/>
     <param name="bgcolor" value="#000000"/>
     <embed align="middle" allowscriptaccess="sameDomain" bgcolor="#000000" height="18" name="scroller" pluginspage="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" quality="high" src="scroller_en.swf" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="927" wmode="transparent"/>
    </object>
   </div>
  </div>
  <script src="http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js" type="text/javascript">
  </script>
  <script type="text/javascript">
   _uacct = "UA-316143-2";
urchinTracker();
  </script>
 </body>
</html>
