<html>
 <head>
  <title>
   degob.org
  </title>
  <link href="degob.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
  <script language="JavaScript">
   <!-- Hide the script from old browsers --

	var current;

	function toc(toc_id) {

		toc_element = document.getElementById(toc_id);

		if ((toc_element.style.display=='none')||(toc_element.style.display=='')) {
			toc_element.style.display='block';
		}
		else {
			toc_element.style.display='none';
		}
	}


    // --end hiding here -->
  </script>
 </head>
 <body>
  <div id="wrapper">
   <div id="header">
   </div>
   <div id="main_wrapper">
    <div id="left_menu">
     <div id="left_menu_content">
      <a class="menu_main" href="?extsearch">
       Search
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php">
       Main page
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=203">
       On DEGOB
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2049">
       The Survivor Witnesses
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="?glossary">
       Glossary
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Encylopedia of Camps
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Supporters
      </a>
      <br/>
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="content_container">
     <div id="content">
      <div>
       <div style="float:left;display:inline">
        <h1 style="display:inline">
         Protocol Nr. 2623
        </h1>
       </div>
       <a href="?showjk_img=2623" style="text-decoration:none; color:#453c2d; ">
        <span style="vertical-align:middle; cursor:pointer; float:right; font-size:11px; width:126px; height:17px;  background-image:url('http://degob.hu/images/arrow_l.jpg'); background-repeat:no-repeat; color:#453c2d; font-weight:bold;">
         <span style="padding-left:30px;">
          scanned image
         </span>
        </span>
       </a>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both; margin-bottom:25px;">
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Á. J.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         male
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Nagyvárad
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1892
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Nagyvárad
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         box maker
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Ghetto
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Nagyvárad
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Camps
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Auschwitz, Buchenwald, Magdeburg, Rethensee, Buchenwald
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
      </div>
      <br/>
      <br/>
      The person in question has given us the following information:

I lived with my wife in Nagyvárad and had a factory that produced boxes. The 
22nd of April, local Jews were taken into the ghetto. My wife moved in, whereas 
I volunteered to work together with 500 Jewish men. We were led to construct a 
road in the area of Élesd. We stayed there for 8 days, then we started working 
on deforestation. It was a project organised by moral Christians who wanted to 
save these few hundred people. In the village hall of Élesd they tried to make 
us believe that we were not going to be taken into the ghetto till we kept on 
working.

One day, drunken gendarmes put us all on trucks and carried us to the village 
hall where they seized all our belongings, beat us up, and took us into the 
ghetto of Nagyvárad. There was an interrogation center in the ghetto, a storage 
room of the Dreher Brewery, where around 30 detectives of Budapest were 
investigating suspicious cases, or tortured people who had been denounced. They 
started by beating and went on to use high voltage electricity; they used 
medieval methods to learn what people kept in secret. There were people detained 
for as long as ten days. No one can imagine these tortures. People were carried 
out on stretchers and most of them committed suicide afterwards. My case was 
made worse by the fact that they assaulted also my wife claiming that we had 
hidden valuables.

The 27th of May, we were entrained. There were 75 of us in a freight car; they 
gave us half a kilo of bread at departure but no water. 5 people died in our 
car. Corpses were not allowed to be removed.

We arrived in Auschwitz at night; freight cars were opened only in the morning. 
We left behind our luggage, and they started the usual selection. Women with 
children and the elderly were directed leftwards. I do not know what happened to 
them but we have not seen them since. I had to stay on the right side among men. 
They led us into the baths, gave us prisoner-dresses, cut the hair off and took 
us into a block. These 8 days were a misery for me, Polish Capos were the 
leaders, who walked around with whips and clubs and would strike you for no 
reason. We could not go into the block during the day; we had to stay in the 
courtyard all day long. It was redemption when I got to Buchenwald with a 
transport of labourers 8 days later.

In a concentration camp in Buchenwald they gave us numbers, registered us, and 
sent us to Magdeburg 8 days later.

We arrived in Magdeburg 2,000 of us. We cleared debris after bombings and 
constructed bunkers. Once we suffered a serious air raid. German civilians and 
the SS went into shelter, whereas we could not leave the workplace. 300 of us 
worked there. A bomb hit and killed 40 people and injured many. My arm was 
broken, it is still in a plaster cast. I was put in the hospital of Rothensee. 
They did not clean the wound just put a bandage on it so that I did not bleed to 
death.

The injured (around 80-90 people) were kept in hospital for a few days before 
they put us on trucks and carried us back to Buchenwald. I laid in an infirmary 
for three months. The bandage was removed 6 weeks later, then my skin came off 
and my arm got infected. They started to cure me and 6 weeks later I felt well 
enough to go back working. We constructed roads. This job was not that 
difficult, I worked as much as I could, they did not insult me. The only problem 
was the cold: I had no coat and suffered much of the cold. For 3-4 months I 
never felt a little bit of warm. Reveille was at 4.30 am; from 5.30 till 6 am 
there was a roll call followed by coffee and we marched out to work accompanied 
by music. A litre of soup as lunch was served on the workplace; from where we 
returned at 7 pm. Prisoners of other nationalities played music.

Treatment was ok till September, when two SS men arrived who cruelly beat Jews. 
A great number of people died since we were rushed at work. In half a year so 
many people died as in other places maybe in 5 years. Later, our rations were 
consisted of 250 grams of bread a day, 25 grams of margarine and three quarters 
of a litre of some bad soup in the evening. Having so poor provisions we had to 
work 12 hours a day, and line up for roll calls in the morning and the evening, 
in flimsy clothes. As a result, many got renal diseases, while others got 
frozen.

The 6th of April, they made 30,000 Jews, all the inhabitants of the camp, line 
up in order to get the camp evacuated because the American frontline got close. 
In block no. 61 there were prisoners laying around from exhaustion. Jewish 
doctors had to kill them with some injections. Meanwhile, 2,000 SS men lined up 
with machineguns on the order: "Juden linke um." In every minute we were waiting 
for our execution. We were not executed but had to start walking. We went 
towards Weimar and heard when the SS was asked whether they would carry out the 
order to execute us. The answer was yes. Many people had collapsed on the way  
as a consequence they were shot. But several others died of exhaustion or 
starvation as well.

Americans liberated us a few kilometres from Weimar in the middle of April. This 
has ended our misery.

Now, first I want to cure my arm, which is still in a plaster cast. When I will 
have recovered I will return to Nagyvárad, and look for my wife and discuss 
future plans with her.
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="right_menu">
     <div id="right_menu_content">
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main_hu" href="index.php?showarticle=2031">
        The Holocaust in Hungary
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_1')">
        Perpetrators
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_1">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2011">
          The Gendarmerie
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2012">
          The Police
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2013">
          The Public Administration
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_2')">
        The Gentile Population
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_2">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2014">
          Indifference, Antipathy, Antisemitism
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2015">
          Hungarian Rescuers
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_12')">
        Regions of Destruction
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_12">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2016">
          The Capital: Budapest
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2033">
          A City in the Countryside: Balassagyarmat
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2034">
          A Village: Rákosszentmihály
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_4')">
        Women
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_4">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2017">
          Hungarian Jewish Women in the Kanadakommando
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2018">
          SS Female Overseers in Auschwitz
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2019">
        The First Massacre
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2020">
        Antisemitism
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2021">
        The Jewish Council
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2022">
        Resistance, Zionists
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_9')">
        Death Factory - Auschwitz-Birkenau 1944
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_9">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2023">
          Prisoners' Fate in Auschwitz-Birkenau
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2024">
          SS physicians
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2025">
          What did the Victims know?
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_10')">
        Rescue
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_10">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2026">
          Decent Gendarmes
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2027">
          Policemen
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2028">
          Humane Officials
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2029">
          The Military
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2030">
        Looting
       </a>
      </div>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2032">
       Labour Service
      </a>
      <script>
       toc('menu_12');toc('menu_12');
				if (current!=null) toc(current);
      </script>
     </div>
    </div>
   </div>
   <div id="footer">
   </div>
   <a href="http://degob.hu/index.php" style="text-decoration:none;" title="magyar">
    <div id="switch_banner" title="switch to Hungarian">
     váltás magyarra
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="bphm_banner">
    <a href="http://bphm.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="bphm.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/BPHM_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#1d3c51;font-size:9px;">
      bphm.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <div id="holomo_banner">
    <a href="http://www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/holo_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#5b4b32;font-size:9px;">
      holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <a href="index.php">
    <div id="home">
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="scroller">
    <object align="middle" classid="clsid:d27cdb6e-ae6d-11cf-96b8-444553540000" codebase="http://fpdownload.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=8,0,0,0" height="18" id="scroller" width="927">
     <param name="allowScriptAccess" value="sameDomain"/>
     <param name="movie" value="scroller_en.swf"/>
     <param name="quality" value="high"/>
     <param name="wmode" value="transparent"/>
     <param name="bgcolor" value="#000000"/>
     <embed align="middle" allowscriptaccess="sameDomain" bgcolor="#000000" height="18" name="scroller" pluginspage="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" quality="high" src="scroller_en.swf" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="927" wmode="transparent"/>
    </object>
   </div>
  </div>
  <script src="http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js" type="text/javascript">
  </script>
  <script type="text/javascript">
   _uacct = "UA-316143-2";
urchinTracker();
  </script>
 </body>
</html>
