<html>
 <head>
  <title>
   degob.org
  </title>
  <link href="degob.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
  <script language="JavaScript">
   <!-- Hide the script from old browsers --

	var current;

	function toc(toc_id) {

		toc_element = document.getElementById(toc_id);

		if ((toc_element.style.display=='none')||(toc_element.style.display=='')) {
			toc_element.style.display='block';
		}
		else {
			toc_element.style.display='none';
		}
	}


    // --end hiding here -->
  </script>
 </head>
 <body>
  <div id="wrapper">
   <div id="header">
   </div>
   <div id="main_wrapper">
    <div id="left_menu">
     <div id="left_menu_content">
      <a class="menu_main" href="?extsearch">
       Search
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php">
       Main page
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=203">
       On DEGOB
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2049">
       The Survivor Witnesses
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="?glossary">
       Glossary
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Encylopedia of Camps
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Supporters
      </a>
      <br/>
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="content_container">
     <div id="content">
      <div>
       <div style="float:left;display:inline">
        <h1 style="display:inline">
         Protocol Nr. 3596
        </h1>
       </div>
       <a href="?showjk_img=3596" style="text-decoration:none; color:#453c2d; ">
        <span style="vertical-align:middle; cursor:pointer; float:right; font-size:11px; width:126px; height:17px;  background-image:url('http://degob.hu/images/arrow_l.jpg'); background-repeat:no-repeat; color:#453c2d; font-weight:bold;">
         <span style="padding-left:30px;">
          scanned image
         </span>
        </span>
       </a>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both; margin-bottom:25px;">
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         dr. L. L.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         female
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
      </div>
      <br/>
      <br/>
      The person in question has given us the following information:

Notes of Mrs Dr Lajos Lévy attached to the protocol of senior doctor and 
director Dr Lajos Lévy 

At the beginning of the Szálasi terror, already following the first harassments 
hundreds of injured people appeared in the hospital in Wesselényi Street with 
broken bones, bullets, and all signs of blows and physical assaults. For around 
three weeks a young surgeon resolved surgical problems since several of the 
young doctors performed labour service while senior doctors younger than 60 were 
taken away to dig trenches. As a result of the decree of the 20th of October 
enforcing the draft for the labour service the hospital faced the danger of 
remaining without doctors and nurses. Having passed a night in terror and 
uncertainty and having obtained some advice and information, the day after the 
managers of the hospital handed in a list of absolutely needed staff members, 
who had not joined up because they could not have left unattended the sick 
people who were interned here.

In November, it started to be more and more dangerous to walk on the streets; 
consequently, most doctors and also the director of the hospital were forced to 
move in.

The order to move and the vision of the nightmare of the planned ghetto, and the 
images of eventual deportation and extermination seized the mind of mentally 
weaker people and they lost their vigour and courage. Besides, many people lost 
their relatives because men and women were taken away for labour service. 
Available space in the hospital proved to be insufficient after a second wave of 
suicides. We had to use also the lobby of the temple and some additional rooms. 
Unconscious people lying along the centre line of the temple offered an 
astonishingly distressing view. Some began to recover and came back to life, 
others slid into a profound slumber towards death. Illuminated by a beam of 
light, this image became even more poignant: a doctor (a refugee from the 
countryside) was sitting next to this line of people never leaving his post, 
observing them, giving them injections, and fighting for the life of each of 
them.

In the meantime, outside the hospital the Jews tried to find its place: those 
who received protection from the Swiss, the Swedish, or the papal legate 
gathered in the houses of the so-called international ghetto. The rest occupied 
flats in the designated area of the ghetto. The hospital in Wesselényi Street 
was directly neighbouring the ghetto. Since people who were supposed to move 
into the ghetto were extremely anxious about their future the alternative of 
getting into hospital appeared a way out, especially from the time the 
International Red Cross had protected the hospital. The more we approached the 
deadline when Jews had to move into the ghetto, the greater the fight for 
hospital stay became. We had to respect regulations: people of the age group 
that was obliged to do labour service could not be accepted. Nevertheless, the 
hospital was rapidly filled and we had to set up emergency hospitals. Almost 
every second day we occupied an apartment building with the goal to transform it 
into a hospital. Furniture of the people who had moved out was gathered in an 
apartment and mattresses of newcomers occupied the liberated space. The team of 
managers allowed one functioning kitchen in a place or on a floor. This team 
worked with a doctor and a nurse and was made up of a senior doctor and 
director, a financial administrator and sometimes a secretary. Serious medical 
care was only rarely needed. The dominant sickness was infectious enteritis, 
spread by people from the group of several hundreds of men and women who had 
been saved and taken back from deportation from the border at Hegyeshalom. 
Frozen legs and feet, purulence and bruises were also frequent. The number of 
those who were taken back this way in December through the intervention of the 
Swiss Embassy and the International Red Cross is judged to be several thousands. 
It was only natural that once again it was the hospital that had to give asylum 
to these exhausted, worn out people.

The doctor at the registry office had an unbelievably difficult job. During the 
time span when people were allowed to go out, crowds rushed to apply for medical 
care in the hospital. Everyone was scared to stay in the area of the ghetto, 
even in hospitals of the Red Cross in the ghetto. To stop the flow of people 
that would have soon made hospitals horribly overcrowded, the Red Cross took 
over the work of registration and centralised it. Now, they sent the patients 
into their new hospitals.

When the plank fence of the ghetto was ready there was another panic, and 
hospitals outside the ghetto were attacked now even more vehemently. Moving into 
the ghetto hung like a sword of Damocles over the people.

The siege of Pest began, and the city started to be severely bombed. There was a 
water shortage. Water arrived only on the ground floor and later only to the 
basement level. Carrying water for washing and flushing toilets up to the third 
floor appeared to be a tragedy! All sound patients (and there were a lot of them 
thanks to this peculiar situation) carried and exchanged their drinking water 
daily.

The frontline got closer to the hospital, shells started to fall in, and windows 
broke because of blasts. The situation in the operating room started to become 
frightening as the number of injured people taken from the area and from the 
ghetto increased. We had to move the operating room into the more secure 
basement floor. We had to empty the space that had been used as a ward. 

Also the image of the hospital changed: the injured were plodding all around, or 
were carried on stretchers. Tables for bandaging became full of injured, while 
the floor was full of stretchers and bleeding injured people on them. We had to 
empty the part of the basement meant to be an air raid shelter to make room for 
stretchers. Day and night the operating room was busy. The doctors, the staff, 
the orderlies treated the unfortunates with exceptional self-sacrifice. 
Amputations were frequent. Several started agonising already on stretchers and 
perished already before being placed on the operating table.

Among the great number of nail-biting days that the hospital had to go through 
these may have been the most stressful. No one wanted to go to the ghetto. 
Everyone fought against it and opposed it. In the hall of the temple and in 
certain wards there was almost a revolutionary atmosphere. People started to 
proclaim threats, while others tried to commit suicide. In one of these cases, a 
patient defended himself with a knife and hurt the hand of the doctor who 
attempted to pump his stomach. The Jewish Council presented us a list and 
ordered the people who were on it to move out, but only very few patients did 
leave. There were now more patients on the corridors, in staircases and on the 
landings.

As the siege proceeded, Arrow Cross atrocities started to become more intense. 
Patients with a bullet in the back of the neck coming back from the bank of 
Danube testified to this process. One night 4-5 shot people were carried to us, 
who presented the story of the other 200 unfortunates. They wiped out entire 
families. Shot victims were saved and carried in from all around the city, from 
the ghetto  and not only from the bank of Danube. It was at this time when 
certain Jewish houses were attacked, for instance when they massacred people in 
the air raid shelter of one of the houses in Wesselényi Street. Forty-six 
innocent Jews were killed here, among them a teacher couple from the Gymnasium 
of Israelite Girls.

More serious projects to save people started in December, initiated by the 
representative of the Red Cross working with hospitals. This movement started in 
our hospital and comprised a few younger surgeons of the medical staff, some 
women doctors and internists. In these days the Arrow Cross used a couple of 
houses of Teleki Square as a collecting place for people of Jewish origins 
captured outside the ghetto. These might have been pseudo-Christians in hiding, 
previously tolerated inhabitants of childrens institutes, or labour servicemen 
who returned from Hegyeshalom and were now facing a destiny of terror. The goal 
of the project was to save the sick among them and provide them hospital care. 
First, the Red Cross requested purely Christian doctors to check the sick among 
this group of people. However, when these people witnessed the first blows in 
the face from the Arrow Cross, they jumped back in the car and drove off. Hence, 
doctors were selected in the emergency hospital to single out the sick with a 
police escort. Although they had permission to select only men and women older 
or younger than the working age in order to bring them into the medical centre 
for selections (as they called it) of the ghetto, they tried to save mostly 
people within the age limits. A good idea could save the life of a person. For 
instance, rabbi Sch. was saved by a doctor, who declared the rabbi may endanger 
the public and infect the whole camp with a typhus bacterium. The committee had 
to fight for each of its participants. They were people who risked their own 
life every day during this three-week long project.

In the middle of December, they started entraining the families of the Arrow 
Cross to make them escape from Budapest. On the complaint of brother party 
leader B., who whined that not even they had bread for the journey, the Red 
Cross offered 50 loaves of bread for their relatives but demanded in return that 
they let free the 46 women they had found sick the same day. In the collecting 
house of Teleki Square there were 80 young women that day. Although they had a 
written permit only for 46 sick women, eventually, they let free all 80 of them 
the day after. 

As the siege progressed the situation in the hospital became more and more 
difficult, operations were carried out in candlelight, candles, and petroleum 
lamps lit the great ward where the nurse on night duty staggered along between 
injured and operated patients. The danger of little candles swinging in the air 
above the beds of patients (these were their own sources of light), of flashes 
of matches here and there was great. A rescue action was quite unimaginable in 
case of a catastrophe.

When the Arrow Cross led the inhabitants of Swiss and Swedish protected houses 
into the ghetto there was another wave of people at the gates of the hospital, 
which was however firmly kept closed this time. We saw sad marches in front of 
the hospital. They were waiting for hours in long queues to be inspected - in 
reality to be robbed - at the gate of the ghetto. We received complaints and 
written pleas about elderly people lying on the cold stone floor of kitchens 
without any bedclothes. Now, guards would let people with medical certificates 
out of the ghetto to have an operation or an X-ray. There would have been a 
chance to get into hospital but there were no more empty places! The maximum 
number of patients  which was reached during this period - was between 1,500-
2,000: the same amount of saved lives.

Being overcrowded only added to our vulnerability, which steadily increased 
anyway. Once, two Arrow Cross men got in and wanted to check the identity of 
people, but we managed to dissuade them. Luckily, a grenade hit some Arrow Cross 
guards who were treated by doctors of the hospital. In return, we got a 
document, which declared that they were going to safeguard the hospital. This 
document gave us protection against unauthorized brothers. The danger in which 
we lived can be easily understood from the case of the hospital technician. Once 
he was working outside but failed to put on the armband of the Red Cross instead 
of the yellow star, although as a member of the hospitals staff he had the 
right to wear it. An Arrow Cross man passed by and noticed his good quality 
leather jacket and forced him to leave. A few days later his corpse was lying 
next to the hospital.

Lack of electricity contributed to another phenomenon. Men and women living in 
overcrowded conditions closed together for such a long time eventually tried to 
reduce tension in the most natural way. Burgeoning sexual life and its 
exaggerated presence as opposed to normal hospital circumstances gave much 
trouble to the staff. Warnings, evening identity checks were all useless, 
doctors and janitors went around with torches in vain. But everyone knew that we 
could have effectively countered this phenomenon only by removing immoral 
patients but that could have been equal to a death sentence. So this moral 
disciplining was not very functional.

Meanwhile shells and grenades hit the hospital. German flak in the neighbourhood 
attracted the bombs of aircrafts. Even the least dangerous hits of bombs could 
cost the life of people. A bomb, still at the beginning of the siege, fell in 
the courtyard and killed two people; one of them was a young labour serviceman. 
At the same time it injured several people seemingly lightly, but their injuries 
proved later to be serious. First, a blast broke all windows of the façade 
facing Wesselényi Street, later of the façade of Nagyatádi Street. Only the 
windows of the corridor facing the courtyard remained intact. It became always 
more difficult to get hold of food and lint supplies. Once the courage and 
ingenuity of a labour serviceman solved the problem of lint shortage for a few 
days, because he ventured out in the protection of his helmet while bombs were 
falling all around. Work in hospital was accompanied by horrible gunfire and 
shellfire. Splinters of grenade fell also into the basement, injuring a woman 
orderly  luckily only lightly. We had to go on working: stretchers followed one 
another - up to the gate, placed on the stairs and back to the operating room.

Most of the injured came from the ghetto. But also gendarmes, Arrow Cross men 
and victims were carried in all mixed together. A gendarme lying on the 
operating table made the following comment: How many times we kicked them and 
now they cure us so diligently!"

Finally, Russians appeared during the night of January the 18th. Some nurses of 
the Upper Provinces, who spoke good Russian, triumphantly led them around in the 
wards. The inner tension  especially in younger generations  now gave place to 
a long awaited happy state, which meant the end of suffering.

The first reaction was a great exodus out of the hospital. But bombs still hit 
the building as the siege of Budapest finished only much later. A grenade that 
hit the staircase at the first floor exactly when Russians were still there 
caused the greatest war damage. Among mortal casualties there were two doctors 
of the hospital and a woman orderly and a recovered ex-patient who was ready to 
help us in anything. Splinters of grenades caused great numbers of injuries. 
Afterwards, wind blew also in the staircase since the explosion broke the rest 
of the intact windows of the corridors.

And who were those who kept knocking on the door of the hospital and implored us 
to accept them notwithstanding the adverse circumstances? All hospitals of the 
ghetto remained suddenly without doctors, nurses and financial administrators. 
Without food and treatment the healthy soon left. The sick and the elderly 
dragged themselves, if they could, to the hospital in Wesselényi Street, while 
other sick people who remained died of hunger and cold. Nevertheless, the 
central office ordered us not to accept any more new patients. It is beyond 
words what was happening at the gate. Yet, we managed to lead them towards more 
humane considerations pointing out that registering them would have changed 
nothing unless the hospital could afford giving them also the needed treatment. 
We attained the possibility to carry in the sick and helpless elderly on in 
wheelbarrows from the hospitals of the ghetto. They could at least finish their 
lives under more humane conditions.
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="right_menu">
     <div id="right_menu_content">
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main_hu" href="index.php?showarticle=2031">
        The Holocaust in Hungary
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_1')">
        Perpetrators
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_1">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2011">
          The Gendarmerie
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2012">
          The Police
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2013">
          The Public Administration
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_2')">
        The Gentile Population
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_2">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2014">
          Indifference, Antipathy, Antisemitism
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2015">
          Hungarian Rescuers
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_12')">
        Regions of Destruction
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_12">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2016">
          The Capital: Budapest
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2033">
          A City in the Countryside: Balassagyarmat
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2034">
          A Village: Rákosszentmihály
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_4')">
        Women
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_4">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2017">
          Hungarian Jewish Women in the Kanadakommando
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2018">
          SS Female Overseers in Auschwitz
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2019">
        The First Massacre
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2020">
        Antisemitism
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2021">
        The Jewish Council
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2022">
        Resistance, Zionists
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_9')">
        Death Factory - Auschwitz-Birkenau 1944
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_9">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2023">
          Prisoners' Fate in Auschwitz-Birkenau
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2024">
          SS physicians
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2025">
          What did the Victims know?
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_10')">
        Rescue
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_10">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2026">
          Decent Gendarmes
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2027">
          Policemen
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2028">
          Humane Officials
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2029">
          The Military
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2030">
        Looting
       </a>
      </div>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2032">
       Labour Service
      </a>
      <script>
       toc('menu_12');toc('menu_12');
				if (current!=null) toc(current);
      </script>
     </div>
    </div>
   </div>
   <div id="footer">
   </div>
   <a href="http://degob.hu/index.php" style="text-decoration:none;" title="magyar">
    <div id="switch_banner" title="switch to Hungarian">
     váltás magyarra
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="bphm_banner">
    <a href="http://bphm.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="bphm.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/BPHM_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#1d3c51;font-size:9px;">
      bphm.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <div id="holomo_banner">
    <a href="http://www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/holo_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#5b4b32;font-size:9px;">
      holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <a href="index.php">
    <div id="home">
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="scroller">
    <object align="middle" classid="clsid:d27cdb6e-ae6d-11cf-96b8-444553540000" codebase="http://fpdownload.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=8,0,0,0" height="18" id="scroller" width="927">
     <param name="allowScriptAccess" value="sameDomain"/>
     <param name="movie" value="scroller_en.swf"/>
     <param name="quality" value="high"/>
     <param name="wmode" value="transparent"/>
     <param name="bgcolor" value="#000000"/>
     <embed align="middle" allowscriptaccess="sameDomain" bgcolor="#000000" height="18" name="scroller" pluginspage="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" quality="high" src="scroller_en.swf" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="927" wmode="transparent"/>
    </object>
   </div>
  </div>
  <script src="http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js" type="text/javascript">
  </script>
  <script type="text/javascript">
   _uacct = "UA-316143-2";
urchinTracker();
  </script>
 </body>
</html>
