<html>
 <head>
  <title>
   degob.org
  </title>
  <link href="degob.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
  <script language="JavaScript">
   <!-- Hide the script from old browsers --

	var current;

	function toc(toc_id) {

		toc_element = document.getElementById(toc_id);

		if ((toc_element.style.display=='none')||(toc_element.style.display=='')) {
			toc_element.style.display='block';
		}
		else {
			toc_element.style.display='none';
		}
	}


    // --end hiding here -->
  </script>
 </head>
 <body>
  <div id="wrapper">
   <div id="header">
   </div>
   <div id="main_wrapper">
    <div id="left_menu">
     <div id="left_menu_content">
      <a class="menu_main" href="?extsearch">
       Search
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php">
       Main page
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=203">
       On DEGOB
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2049">
       The Survivor Witnesses
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="?glossary">
       Glossary
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Encylopedia of Camps
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Supporters
      </a>
      <br/>
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="content_container">
     <div id="content">
      <div>
       <div style="float:left;display:inline">
        <h1 style="display:inline">
         Protocol Nr. 3584
        </h1>
       </div>
       <a href="?showjk_img=3584" style="text-decoration:none; color:#453c2d; ">
        <span style="vertical-align:middle; cursor:pointer; float:right; font-size:11px; width:126px; height:17px;  background-image:url('http://degob.hu/images/arrow_l.jpg'); background-repeat:no-repeat; color:#453c2d; font-weight:bold;">
         <span style="padding-left:30px;">
          scanned image
         </span>
        </span>
       </a>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both; margin-bottom:25px;">
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         özv. dr. D. S.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         female
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Budapest
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1869
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         housewife
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
      </div>
      <br/>
      <br/>
      The person in question has given us the following information:

Having obtained a Swiss letter of protection I got into the protected house in 
30 Légrády Károly Street. A few days later, the Arrow Cross took all the 
inhabitants of the building into Szent István Park. The elderly were later 
lodged in the cellar of the building No. 22. I passed 14 days in this cellar. 
Meanwhile my son got hold of a referral for me into a hospital and the 10th of 
December I got into the orthodox sanatorium in Városmajor Street, which 
functioned (like other similar health centres) as a so-called Red Cross 
hospital. We were constantly anxious in the hospital since there was diverse 
news spreading every day, and according to some the hospital could not function 
anymore, and the people would be soon moved into the ghetto, etc. The order to 
move into the ghetto was delayed three times. Every time we calmed down a little 
but this relative peace lasted only for a short time because the Arrow Cross 
appeared in the hospital quite frequently. But also Germans visited us 
frequently. Generally, German and Arrow Cross men were searching for watches. It 
went on like this till the 14th of January. On that morning, people were very 
nervous and we felt that something was going to happen. Around noon, three Arrow 
Cross men appeared. They came into the ward to check the identity of the sick. 
First, they asked who were Jews and who were Christians and then asked for the 
documents. Four of us lay in the same room: Baroness Beck, who had been awarded 
for her merits in the First War and was therefore a privileged Jew. There were 
also Mrs József Schlesinger and Mrs Vilmos Tauber, and I. Baroness Beck came up 
with her privileged status but they ignored it. They also refuted the identity 
claims of my two other neighbours who declared to be South American citizens. 
Arrow Cross men replied that only Jews could have this kind of documents. I 
tried to save the situation and prove that the ladies were Christians but 
unfortunately, it did not help. It was my turn, and when they asked for my 
documents I responded that I had no documents. I claimed I was a refugee from 
Cegléd and had been carried to Pest by a German car. At the Nyugati railway 
station they had handed me over to the Red Cross, and the Red Cross had placed 
me in this hospital. I told them to check it out with the director. They 
accepted my tale and I was temporarily saved. Two hours later they returned and 
rechecked our identities, and the same happened as before. Around 3:30 pm they 
returned again but now my three unfortunate companions had to stand already 
against the wall. They also ordered me to stand there but I said I could not 
stand up and anyway I was not a Jew but a refugee from Cegléd as I had told them 
twice. For my luck, one of the bandits who remembered the Cegléd story 
recognised me and very politely offered his help to make me stand up, and to 
lead me to the corridor, but he said I had to move fast. As soon as I arrived to 
the corridor I already heard the shots. As far as I know 180 people died this 
time.

By chance or maybe because the lights were switched off they failed to enter 
into one of the rooms. The inhabitants here were Baroness Kohner, Mrs Dr Kammer 
and Mrs Dr Neuman. I spent the night in that room.

The Arrow Cross surrounded the building, and no one could leave or enter. Arrow 
Cross men were walking up and down in the corridors, guarded the rooms, and 
entered them one after the other to rob the dead.

In the morning after this terrible night, I met the survivors, who were mostly 
nurses who had been in hiding with Christian documents and some others who also 
had Aryan documents and were counted as Christians such as Mrs Frigyes Bán or 
Mrs Berkovics. On the other hand, they exterminated 1st doctor and director Dr 
Friedmann and Dr Sulzer together with their families. They returned at noon to 
check whether everyone had died among the ones they had shot, and if there was a 
bit of life in someone they killed her.

After this well-performed mission they instructed us to look for another place 
as they were going to burn down the hospital. The aforementioned attack and 
massacre happened on Sunday, and we stayed in the building till Wednesday, when 
we moved into a rest home. I had obtained a document from the commander of the 
house before, which certified that my documents had been burnt so I managed to 
get into the rest house. Nevertheless, we could not avoid our destiny not even 
here, since Friday, the 19th of January, Arrow Cross bandits visited also this 
place. Three of them appeared and ordered Christians to stand to the right side 
and Jews to the left side. Naturally, I ranked among Christians also here. The 
rest of my unfortunate Jewish companions, exactly 80 of them, were led to the 
corner of Csaba Street, where they killed them. They repeated the plunder and 
robbed the corpses as it had been done in the sanatorium of Városmajor Street, 
but also Germans visited the home with similar objectives.

I waited for Budas liberation in this rest home; this is where I was when it 
happened.
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="right_menu">
     <div id="right_menu_content">
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main_hu" href="index.php?showarticle=2031">
        The Holocaust in Hungary
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_1')">
        Perpetrators
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_1">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2011">
          The Gendarmerie
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2012">
          The Police
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2013">
          The Public Administration
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_2')">
        The Gentile Population
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_2">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2014">
          Indifference, Antipathy, Antisemitism
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2015">
          Hungarian Rescuers
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_12')">
        Regions of Destruction
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_12">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2016">
          The Capital: Budapest
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2033">
          A City in the Countryside: Balassagyarmat
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2034">
          A Village: Rákosszentmihály
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_4')">
        Women
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_4">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2017">
          Hungarian Jewish Women in the Kanadakommando
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2018">
          SS Female Overseers in Auschwitz
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2019">
        The First Massacre
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2020">
        Antisemitism
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2021">
        The Jewish Council
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2022">
        Resistance, Zionists
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_9')">
        Death Factory - Auschwitz-Birkenau 1944
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_9">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2023">
          Prisoners' Fate in Auschwitz-Birkenau
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2024">
          SS physicians
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2025">
          What did the Victims know?
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_10')">
        Rescue
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_10">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2026">
          Decent Gendarmes
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2027">
          Policemen
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2028">
          Humane Officials
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2029">
          The Military
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2030">
        Looting
       </a>
      </div>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2032">
       Labour Service
      </a>
      <script>
       toc('menu_12');toc('menu_12');
				if (current!=null) toc(current);
      </script>
     </div>
    </div>
   </div>
   <div id="footer">
   </div>
   <a href="http://degob.hu/index.php" style="text-decoration:none;" title="magyar">
    <div id="switch_banner" title="switch to Hungarian">
     váltás magyarra
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="bphm_banner">
    <a href="http://bphm.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="bphm.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/BPHM_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#1d3c51;font-size:9px;">
      bphm.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <div id="holomo_banner">
    <a href="http://www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/holo_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#5b4b32;font-size:9px;">
      holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <a href="index.php">
    <div id="home">
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="scroller">
    <object align="middle" classid="clsid:d27cdb6e-ae6d-11cf-96b8-444553540000" codebase="http://fpdownload.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=8,0,0,0" height="18" id="scroller" width="927">
     <param name="allowScriptAccess" value="sameDomain"/>
     <param name="movie" value="scroller_en.swf"/>
     <param name="quality" value="high"/>
     <param name="wmode" value="transparent"/>
     <param name="bgcolor" value="#000000"/>
     <embed align="middle" allowscriptaccess="sameDomain" bgcolor="#000000" height="18" name="scroller" pluginspage="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" quality="high" src="scroller_en.swf" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="927" wmode="transparent"/>
    </object>
   </div>
  </div>
  <script src="http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js" type="text/javascript">
  </script>
  <script type="text/javascript">
   _uacct = "UA-316143-2";
urchinTracker();
  </script>
 </body>
</html>
