<html>
 <head>
  <title>
   degob.org
  </title>
  <link href="degob.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
  <script language="JavaScript">
   <!-- Hide the script from old browsers --

	var current;

	function toc(toc_id) {

		toc_element = document.getElementById(toc_id);

		if ((toc_element.style.display=='none')||(toc_element.style.display=='')) {
			toc_element.style.display='block';
		}
		else {
			toc_element.style.display='none';
		}
	}


    // --end hiding here -->
  </script>
 </head>
 <body>
  <div id="wrapper">
   <div id="header">
   </div>
   <div id="main_wrapper">
    <div id="left_menu">
     <div id="left_menu_content">
      <a class="menu_main" href="?extsearch">
       Search
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php">
       Main page
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=203">
       On DEGOB
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2049">
       The Survivor Witnesses
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="?glossary">
       Glossary
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Encylopedia of Camps
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Supporters
      </a>
      <br/>
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="content_container">
     <div id="content">
      <div>
       <div style="float:left;display:inline">
        <h1 style="display:inline">
         Protocol Nr. 1640
        </h1>
       </div>
       <a href="?showjk_img=1640" style="text-decoration:none; color:#453c2d; ">
        <span style="vertical-align:middle; cursor:pointer; float:right; font-size:11px; width:126px; height:17px;  background-image:url('http://degob.hu/images/arrow_l.jpg'); background-repeat:no-repeat; color:#453c2d; font-weight:bold;">
         <span style="padding-left:30px;">
          scanned image
         </span>
        </span>
       </a>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both; margin-bottom:25px;">
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         dr. H. L. M.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         male
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Pécs
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1915
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Budapest
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         attorney candidate
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Concentration
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         labour service company no. 104/3
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Camps
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Donnerskirchen, Sopron, Győr, Schandorf, Mauthausen, Günskirchen
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
      </div>
      <br/>
      <br/>
      The person in question has given us the following information:

Jewish laws concerned me only in as much as my application was accepted only by 
the University of Pécs, and even there I needed the support of someone to get 
in. At the university, I witnessed some harassment, beatings and things like 
that. Antisemitism was intense at that time and in some cases I also received 
some beatings. Having done some lawyers practice in Mohács and Pécs I came to 
Pest and found a job. Later, however, I obtained new training and worked for the 
weaving factory Star. I had no problems here since I worked as a physical 
labourer. The 15th of March, 1943, I left the factory and was drafted for labour 
service in Mohács. Later, I was resent to Pest to work in the package selection 
department of the post office No. 70., and later I worked as a draftsman for the 
boss. Here I had a good life till I was sent into Transylvania. 
In Dés, in Désakna we had a malevolent commander, a criminal, 2nd Lieutenant 
Ferenc Fehér, who came from Vízvár in Somogy. There was also Ferenc Kökönyei who 
stole my watch and wore it. The 19th of February, 1944, at 10 pm Béla 
(S)#teckel, who was on night patrol, took me and 11 of my companions to the 
headquarters from the Jewish Casino although I had a regular permission for a 
leave. Here I had to stand 40 minutes and he slapped me and broke my eardrum. I 
made a great fuss about it, I went to the army corps headquarters but in the 
meanwhile Germans entered the country and I had to withdraw the denunciation. 

First, we worked on railway construction for the railway co., later we lay 
military cables in the ground between Óradna and Újradna. We had to walk 28 
kilometres a day back and forth to the workplace. We worked only during the time 
that remained.

Our correspondence (both incoming and outgoing) was destroyed by the captain of 
the troop, so we gathered torn pieces of letters from the toilet. 
I had another incident with Cadet Sergeant Károly Fej?s (from Szekszárd) who 

Jewish laws concerned me only in as much as my application was accepted only by 
the University of Pécs, and even there I needed the support of someone to get 
in. At the university, I witnessed some harassment, beatings and things like 
that. Antisemitism was intense at that time and in some cases I also received 
some beatings. Having done some lawyers practice in Mohács and Pécs I came to 
Pest and found a job. Later, however, I obtained new training and worked for the 
weaving factory Star. I had no problems here since I worked as a physical 
labourer. The 15th of March, 1943, I left the factory and was drafted for labour 
service in Mohács. Later, I was resent to Pest to work in the package selection 
department of the post office No. 70., and later I worked as a draftsman for the 
boss. Here I had a good life till I was sent into Transylvania. 
In Dés, in Désakna we had a malevolent commander, a criminal, 2nd Lieutenant 
Ferenc Fehér, who came from Vízvár in Somogy. There was also Ferenc Kökönyei who 
stole my watch and wore it. The 19th of February, 1944, at 10 pm Béla 
(S)#teckel, who was on night patrol, took me and 11 of my companions to the 
headquarters from the Jewish Casino although I had a regular permission for a 
leave. Here I had to stand 40 minutes and he slapped me and broke my eardrum. I 
made a great fuss about it, I went to the army corps headquarters but in the 
meanwhile Germans entered the country and I had to withdraw the denunciation. 

First, we worked on railway construction for the railway co., later we lay 
military cables in the ground between Óradna and Újradna. We had to walk 28 
kilometres a day back and forth to the workplace. We worked only during the time 
that remained.

Our correspondence (both incoming and outgoing) was destroyed by the captain of 
the troop, so we gathered torn pieces of letters from the toilet. 
I had another incident with Cadet Sergeant Károly Fej?s (from Szekszárd) who 
beat me and kicked my bottom because I went to get hold of food. 

During the withdrawal from Transylvania we walked on foot from Újradna till 
Kassa without any food. We got to Kassa the 20th of December. We were terribly 
crammed in the brick factory of Kassa. It was cold, we had no food and suffered 
greatly. We were nearly frozen.

The brick factory of Kassa had a very bad reputation. 7,000 people were kept 
there, out of whom many were frozen and remained without food. In December, they 
entrained us, 75 of us in a freight car, not more. We got food once a day. One 
day we got lunch, the other day dinner, the next day breakfast. We got no water 
at all and could not buy it either because the freight car was locked. It was 
full of lice and people got sick one after the other. We had to use for the 
toilet either a great teapot or other pots. Signs of spotted fever could be 
noticed already on the train. When we arrived there was a dead person, the boy 
next to me.

The journey lasted 9 days till Donnerskirchen. We arrived at 2 am after 9 days 
of travel and the Germans ordered us to work already at 6 am. We had to make 
trenches and bunkers, and had no opportunity to wash. We had no clothes and some 
had to go to work barefoot. Here a sergeant forced me to get out into the snow 
having a temperature of 40 degrees and he also broke my cheek-bone with a club. 
I stayed here 9 days before I escaped with four of my friends in the possession 
of a service ticket which was forged. The 7th of January, we crossed the German-
Hungarian border and arrived in Sopron.

From Sopron we went to Gy?r, where luckily we contracted typhus, which meant 5 
weeks stay in hospital, till the 1st of March. The winter was then over and we 
had a good life in the public hospital of Gy?r. Later, the 1st of March, a 1st 
lieutenant of the Arrow Cross ordered us to leave the hospital and put us into 
the collecting place, the prisoners camp of Gy?r, from where we were taken to 
Schandorf. The sergeant who received us seized all the few things we had, he 
took even razors and soaps, etc. 

The 20th of March, they took us to Szombathely, once again searched our luggage 
and robbed us anew, leaving only a blanket. We then went to Schandorf on foot. 
Here we were crammed, 750 of us, in a single cellar.

In Schandorf we dug trenches and bunkers. We worked from 7 am till 4 pm. In the 
meantime we were maltreated, beaten, and struck. I left this camp, but later I 
heard it became an unbearable place where they shot people. Out of 750 people, 
250 survived this camp. Out of my team of 40 people only 8 survived. The rest 
all died from typhus. There were no doctors at all. They kept these people in a 
special ward of a hospital but it practically meant a death sentence. A 
veterinarian treated them but had no medicine, and people died of starvation. 
Food was anyway extremely scarce. 
We set off from Schandorf because of the Russian approach and walked for 16 
days. We got food 6 times during these 16 days. The person who got tired or was 
out of step was shot. They treated us in an incredible way. An average of 40 
people died per day. The 7th of April, in the forest at Eisenerz, which was one 
of the greatest metallurgical towns, the SS killed 150 Jews with machine guns 
without any reason. About 10 centimetres behind my back my friend was shot, too, 
but we had to proceed, we could not stop. This is how we got to Mauthausen.

In Mauthausen we lived in tents. After an air raid at night 9 people remained 
dead and 20 were wounded. There was also another tragic event that affected my 
spirit a great deal. One of the supervisors was beating a 50-year-old friend of 
mine badly when I jumped on him. He went to the SS to complain about me. The SS 
beat me up so much that they broke my ribs and the bone of my little finger. 

Food was terribly poor. For breakfast we got 0.2 litre of bitter black coffee, 
at noon some turnip soup, and in the evening 100 grams of bread. That was all 
for a day. It was only natural that we became feeble and many died. Death was 
caused by typhus, by starvation and beating.

From Mauthausen we went to Gunskirchen walking for four days. We were starving a 
lot on the way; we ate grass, nettles, and leaves. If they noticed that someone 
was out of step they shot him, they shot also those weak people who could not 
carry on walking, so there were a great number of dead bodies lying on the road. 
50 men were sent ahead to dig graves. Once, an SS soldier disliked the work of a 
gravedigger. He made him stand in the grave and beat him till he died. One could 
see the inner parts of his skull, that is how much he beat him. It was a 
terrible view. The others then covered him with soil.  

When we arrived in Gunskirchen we were put up in wooden huts. They crammed 2,000 
people in a barrack for 500. We were terribly cramped, could not lie down, and 
slept sitting on the rucksacks. Later, I learnt from the Americans that they 
found arsenic in dissected dead bodies. They put little portions into the food 
that caused the general diarrhoea. If someone went to the toilet he could not 
get there because he was shot by the SS. We were very much full of lice; there 
was no water to wash, not even for drinking. Sometimes we got a decilitre of 
water and could decide to use it for drinking or for washing.
Food was turnip soup all the time, and ca. 70 grams of bread.

Here they did not beat us, they just simply shot the people they disliked or 
against whom there were complaints. 

One day we were carrying the dead. One of the boys ran out of energy and put 
the body down before it was allowed. He was shot. Around 150-200 of us died 
daily, completely feeble people who either died of exhaustion or of typhus. We 
had to bury them in a pit. The Americans found this pit; that was when they 
found out about arsenic poisoning. 
The Americans liberated us the 4th of May, 1945, and we started to do better. 
These were my own experiences.
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="right_menu">
     <div id="right_menu_content">
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main_hu" href="index.php?showarticle=2031">
        The Holocaust in Hungary
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_1')">
        Perpetrators
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_1">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2011">
          The Gendarmerie
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2012">
          The Police
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2013">
          The Public Administration
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_2')">
        The Gentile Population
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_2">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2014">
          Indifference, Antipathy, Antisemitism
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2015">
          Hungarian Rescuers
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_12')">
        Regions of Destruction
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_12">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2016">
          The Capital: Budapest
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2033">
          A City in the Countryside: Balassagyarmat
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2034">
          A Village: Rákosszentmihály
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_4')">
        Women
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_4">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2017">
          Hungarian Jewish Women in the Kanadakommando
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2018">
          SS Female Overseers in Auschwitz
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2019">
        The First Massacre
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2020">
        Antisemitism
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2021">
        The Jewish Council
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2022">
        Resistance, Zionists
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_9')">
        Death Factory - Auschwitz-Birkenau 1944
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_9">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2023">
          Prisoners' Fate in Auschwitz-Birkenau
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2024">
          SS physicians
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2025">
          What did the Victims know?
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_10')">
        Rescue
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_10">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2026">
          Decent Gendarmes
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2027">
          Policemen
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2028">
          Humane Officials
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2029">
          The Military
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2030">
        Looting
       </a>
      </div>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2032">
       Labour Service
      </a>
      <script>
       toc('menu_12');toc('menu_12');
				if (current!=null) toc(current);
      </script>
     </div>
    </div>
   </div>
   <div id="footer">
   </div>
   <a href="http://degob.hu/index.php" style="text-decoration:none;" title="magyar">
    <div id="switch_banner" title="switch to Hungarian">
     váltás magyarra
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="bphm_banner">
    <a href="http://bphm.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="bphm.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/BPHM_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#1d3c51;font-size:9px;">
      bphm.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <div id="holomo_banner">
    <a href="http://www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/holo_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#5b4b32;font-size:9px;">
      holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <a href="index.php">
    <div id="home">
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="scroller">
    <object align="middle" classid="clsid:d27cdb6e-ae6d-11cf-96b8-444553540000" codebase="http://fpdownload.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=8,0,0,0" height="18" id="scroller" width="927">
     <param name="allowScriptAccess" value="sameDomain"/>
     <param name="movie" value="scroller_en.swf"/>
     <param name="quality" value="high"/>
     <param name="wmode" value="transparent"/>
     <param name="bgcolor" value="#000000"/>
     <embed align="middle" allowscriptaccess="sameDomain" bgcolor="#000000" height="18" name="scroller" pluginspage="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" quality="high" src="scroller_en.swf" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="927" wmode="transparent"/>
    </object>
   </div>
  </div>
  <script src="http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js" type="text/javascript">
  </script>
  <script type="text/javascript">
   _uacct = "UA-316143-2";
urchinTracker();
  </script>
 </body>
</html>
