<html>
 <head>
  <title>
   degob.org
  </title>
  <link href="degob.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
  <script language="JavaScript">
   <!-- Hide the script from old browsers --

	var current;

	function toc(toc_id) {

		toc_element = document.getElementById(toc_id);

		if ((toc_element.style.display=='none')||(toc_element.style.display=='')) {
			toc_element.style.display='block';
		}
		else {
			toc_element.style.display='none';
		}
	}


    // --end hiding here -->
  </script>
 </head>
 <body>
  <div id="wrapper">
   <div id="header">
   </div>
   <div id="main_wrapper">
    <div id="left_menu">
     <div id="left_menu_content">
      <a class="menu_main" href="?extsearch">
       Search
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php">
       Main page
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=203">
       On DEGOB
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2049">
       The Survivor Witnesses
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="?glossary">
       Glossary
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Encylopedia of Camps
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Supporters
      </a>
      <br/>
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="content_container">
     <div id="content">
      <div>
       <div style="float:left;display:inline">
        <h1 style="display:inline">
         Protocol Nr. 3103
        </h1>
       </div>
       <a href="?showjk_img=3103" style="text-decoration:none; color:#453c2d; ">
        <span style="vertical-align:middle; cursor:pointer; float:right; font-size:11px; width:126px; height:17px;  background-image:url('http://degob.hu/images/arrow_l.jpg'); background-repeat:no-repeat; color:#453c2d; font-weight:bold;">
         <span style="padding-left:30px;">
          scanned image
         </span>
        </span>
       </a>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both; margin-bottom:25px;">
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         L. E.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         male
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Békéscsaba
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1921
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Békéscsaba
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         shop assistant at a drugstore
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Camps
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Buchenwald, Magdeburg
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
      </div>
      <br/>
      <br/>
      The person in question has given us the following information:

The 5th of October, 1942, I was drafted for labour service in Galánta. The 
following day, I had to start working. We collected straw in the courtyard  it 
was already snowing  and had to push wagons full of coal. As we could not push 
them fast enough because they were heavy we had to take off the boots and go on 
working barefoot. Thank God nothing happened to me, only my feet got swollen but 
it lasted for a short time. 

Later, we had to take part in a 6-week long training for recruits. There were 
around 4,000 of us here: the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, and 4th companies. We were treated 
very badly and suffered a lot. For the sake of entertainment they made us creep 
through canals, crawl in mud in our own clothes. The commander was Lieutenant 
Ferenc Reider. 

In the spring, in 1943, they took us to Turjaremete where we already had a 
better life: we lived in tents, and rations were passable. We constructed here 
in 6 months a serpentine road that led to a farm of stallions. When we finished 
it we went to Vác and in October 1943 we worked in the big military barracks. It 
was hard work, we had to carry timber, but only two people could carry one piece 
although it would have been heavy even for 6 of us. Rations were terrible, we 
hardly got anything to eat, and work was very hard. In particular it was Staff 
Sergeant Bakonyi who treated us badly, he would beat up people all the time, and 
when Germans invaded the country he would even have several people shot to 
death. 

A year later, in October 1944, I escaped from the company and came to Pest. Here 
I saw very brutal happenings, especially on Thököly Road, where Arrow Cross men 
shot poor old women because they could not walk. I went into hiding in flats of 
Christians, but unfortunately, I could not stay there for long, since the 
Minister of the Interior of the Arrow Cross Vajna lived in the same building. 
One day, the 4th of December, I went out and the Arrow Cross captured me in the 
street and escorted me to Teleki Square No. 10, where there were already great 
numbers of labour servicemen and civilians. The day after, they took us to the 
railway station of Józsefváros. There were around 4,000 of us; 80 in each 
freight car. We did not get any food till Hegyeshalom although this journey 
lasted for 10 days. We got food from the peasants in return for clothes; for 
example I gave my coat for a little bread. Otherwise I would not have endured 
the journey. We also had to pay for water: a bottle of water cost at least 500 
and 1,000 peng?. Meanwhile, gendarmes kept threatening us that they would shoot 
us before we would have crossed the border because on the way some people had 
escaped.

When we arrived at the border, Germans took charge of us and counted us and 

The 5th of October, 1942, I was drafted for labour service in Galánta. The 
following day, I had to start working. We collected straw in the courtyard  it 
was already snowing  and had to push wagons full of coal. As we could not push 
them fast enough because they were heavy we had to take off the boots and go on 
working barefoot. Thank God nothing happened to me, only my feet got swollen but 
it lasted for a short time. 

Later, we had to take part in a 6-week long training for recruits. There were 
around 4,000 of us here: the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, and 4th companies. We were treated 
very badly and suffered a lot. For the sake of entertainment they made us creep 
through canals, crawl in mud in our own clothes. The commander was Lieutenant 
Ferenc Reider. 

In the spring, in 1943, they took us to Turjaremete where we already had a 
better life: we lived in tents, and rations were passable. We constructed here 
in 6 months a serpentine road that led to a farm of stallions. When we finished 
it we went to Vác and in October 1943 we worked in the big military barracks. It 
was hard work, we had to carry timber, but only two people could carry one piece 
although it would have been heavy even for 6 of us. Rations were terrible, we 
hardly got anything to eat, and work was very hard. In particular it was Staff 
Sergeant Bakonyi who treated us badly, he would beat up people all the time, and 
when Germans invaded the country he would even have several people shot to 
death. 

A year later, in October 1944, I escaped from the company and came to Pest. Here 
I saw very brutal happenings, especially on Thököly Road, where Arrow Cross men 
shot poor old women because they could not walk. I went into hiding in flats of 
Christians, but unfortunately, I could not stay there for long, since the 
Minister of the Interior of the Arrow Cross Vajna lived in the same building. 
One day, the 4th of December, I went out and the Arrow Cross captured me in the 
street and escorted me to Teleki Square No. 10, where there were already great 
numbers of labour servicemen and civilians. The day after, they took us to the 
railway station of Józsefváros. There were around 4,000 of us; 80 in each 
freight car. We did not get any food till Hegyeshalom although this journey 
lasted for 10 days. We got food from the peasants in return for clothes; for 
example I gave my coat for a little bread. Otherwise I would not have endured 
the journey. We also had to pay for water: a bottle of water cost at least 500 
and 1,000 peng?. Meanwhile, gendarmes kept threatening us that they would shoot 
us before we would have crossed the border because on the way some people had 
escaped.

When we arrived at the border, Germans took charge of us and counted us and 
immediately entrained us, and we carried on towards Germany. On the railway 
station following Hegyeshalom they gave us bread and butter. We travelled for 
three days and got bread and butter everyday. 

Three days later, we arrived in Germanys largest extermination camp in 
Buchenwald. We arrived during the night of the 14th of December, we got off the 
train and started off on foot towards the camp, which was in a forest. We walked 
7 kilometres. When we arrived in the camp, they seized our entire luggage and in 
the morning they took away also our clothes and gave us in return striped linen 
clothes. We stayed in these clothes all winter in wooden shoes and nothing else. 
We were very cold, especially during roll calls, which usually lasted for 5 
hours. We got some watery soup only the next morning but nothing else. We got 
100 grams of bread a day and some turnip soup. 800 of us were crammed into a 
single block. Three of us slept on a berth. It was very dirty, and we had no 
opportunity to wash, because there was a single bathroom for 4,000 people. Very 
many people died here because of starvation. A friend of mine noted once: Look, 
theres a wagon, which made 20-30 turns a day and my friend thought it carried 
meat but it turned out that it carried corpses into the crematorium. 

Three months later, we left this place for Magdeburg to work in the Polte 
ammunition plant. Work was very hard but rations were somewhat better. We worked 
from 6 am till 8 pm. One day, the 27th of April, there was a great panic since 
American soldiers appeared and captured all SS soldiers and executed many of 
them. We were very happy. I had typhus and if the Americans had come a few days 
later, we would have all died. The Americans began to cure me immediately and in 
a few weeks time I completely recovered. We had a very good life under the 
Americans since we received everything.
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="right_menu">
     <div id="right_menu_content">
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main_hu" href="index.php?showarticle=2031">
        The Holocaust in Hungary
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_1')">
        Perpetrators
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_1">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2011">
          The Gendarmerie
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2012">
          The Police
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2013">
          The Public Administration
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_2')">
        The Gentile Population
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_2">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2014">
          Indifference, Antipathy, Antisemitism
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2015">
          Hungarian Rescuers
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_12')">
        Regions of Destruction
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_12">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2016">
          The Capital: Budapest
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2033">
          A City in the Countryside: Balassagyarmat
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2034">
          A Village: Rákosszentmihály
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_4')">
        Women
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_4">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2017">
          Hungarian Jewish Women in the Kanadakommando
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2018">
          SS Female Overseers in Auschwitz
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2019">
        The First Massacre
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2020">
        Antisemitism
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2021">
        The Jewish Council
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2022">
        Resistance, Zionists
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_9')">
        Death Factory - Auschwitz-Birkenau 1944
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_9">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2023">
          Prisoners' Fate in Auschwitz-Birkenau
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2024">
          SS physicians
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2025">
          What did the Victims know?
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_10')">
        Rescue
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_10">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2026">
          Decent Gendarmes
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2027">
          Policemen
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2028">
          Humane Officials
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2029">
          The Military
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2030">
        Looting
       </a>
      </div>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2032">
       Labour Service
      </a>
      <script>
       toc('menu_12');toc('menu_12');
				if (current!=null) toc(current);
      </script>
     </div>
    </div>
   </div>
   <div id="footer">
   </div>
   <a href="http://degob.hu/index.php" style="text-decoration:none;" title="magyar">
    <div id="switch_banner" title="switch to Hungarian">
     váltás magyarra
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="bphm_banner">
    <a href="http://bphm.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="bphm.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/BPHM_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#1d3c51;font-size:9px;">
      bphm.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <div id="holomo_banner">
    <a href="http://www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/holo_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#5b4b32;font-size:9px;">
      holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <a href="index.php">
    <div id="home">
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="scroller">
    <object align="middle" classid="clsid:d27cdb6e-ae6d-11cf-96b8-444553540000" codebase="http://fpdownload.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=8,0,0,0" height="18" id="scroller" width="927">
     <param name="allowScriptAccess" value="sameDomain"/>
     <param name="movie" value="scroller_en.swf"/>
     <param name="quality" value="high"/>
     <param name="wmode" value="transparent"/>
     <param name="bgcolor" value="#000000"/>
     <embed align="middle" allowscriptaccess="sameDomain" bgcolor="#000000" height="18" name="scroller" pluginspage="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" quality="high" src="scroller_en.swf" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="927" wmode="transparent"/>
    </object>
   </div>
  </div>
  <script src="http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js" type="text/javascript">
  </script>
  <script type="text/javascript">
   _uacct = "UA-316143-2";
urchinTracker();
  </script>
 </body>
</html>
