<html>
 <head>
  <title>
   degob.org
  </title>
  <link href="degob.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
  <script language="JavaScript">
   <!-- Hide the script from old browsers --

	var current;

	function toc(toc_id) {

		toc_element = document.getElementById(toc_id);

		if ((toc_element.style.display=='none')||(toc_element.style.display=='')) {
			toc_element.style.display='block';
		}
		else {
			toc_element.style.display='none';
		}
	}


    // --end hiding here -->
  </script>
 </head>
 <body>
  <div id="wrapper">
   <div id="header">
   </div>
   <div id="main_wrapper">
    <div id="left_menu">
     <div id="left_menu_content">
      <a class="menu_main" href="?extsearch">
       Search
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php">
       Main page
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=203">
       On DEGOB
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2049">
       The Survivor Witnesses
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="?glossary">
       Glossary
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Encylopedia of Camps
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Supporters
      </a>
      <br/>
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="content_container">
     <div id="content">
      <div>
       <div style="float:left;display:inline">
        <h1 style="display:inline">
         Protocol Nr. 2736
        </h1>
       </div>
       <a href="?showjk_img=2736" style="text-decoration:none; color:#453c2d; ">
        <span style="vertical-align:middle; cursor:pointer; float:right; font-size:11px; width:126px; height:17px;  background-image:url('http://degob.hu/images/arrow_l.jpg'); background-repeat:no-repeat; color:#453c2d; font-weight:bold;">
         <span style="padding-left:30px;">
          scanned image
         </span>
        </span>
       </a>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both; margin-bottom:25px;">
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         L. J.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         male
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Nagykálló
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1889
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Budapest
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         bank clerk
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Camps
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Bergen - Belsen
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
      </div>
      <br/>
      <br/>
      The person in question has given us the following information:

When Germans invaded the country I had to leave my flat and move into a starred 
house. We had lived in a part of Buda where everyone knew his or her neighbours 
and people looked askance at my family and me because we lived still unbothered 
in one of the nicest areas of Budapest. I moved into a starred house in Pest 
partly following the official ruling and partly because Germans molested the 
owners of Jewish villas day after day. They took them away into Svábhegy or 
simply chased them out of their properties in order to occupy them. Already on 
the 19th of March, I was convinced that we would share the destiny of the Jews 
of the countryside; it was only a matter of time. As the situation became 
gradually always better during the time we lived in a starred house I became 
optimistic and began to hope that we may avoid misery. Unfortunately, I was 
wrong.

The 15th of October, I became a privileged person according to the decree of the 
Lakatos government. A few hours later, the proclamation (of the Regent) was 
broadcasted, and I thought we had won the battle. After this great happiness I 
was terribly disappointed when the commander of the house Gyula Nádori appeared 
with an armband of the Arrow Cross and other similar insignia and gave a long 
talk in the evening to the male inhabitants of the building finishing it with an 
exclamation: Long live the Regent Szálasi! We could do nothing else but wait 
and see what would happen. It was prohibited to leave the house and we did not 
know what was happening in town, we only heard gunfire and sounds of weapons all 
the time. I fell sick; in addition to my old war injuries signs of thrombosis 
appeared. The doctor ordered me to stay completely inactive since even minimal 
movements might be fatal. Despite that, on the 20th of October, I was chased out 
of bed when the commander of the house Gyula Nádori accompanied by a policeman 
went around entering all flats to collect the people who were able to work. He 
said I had the right to stay in bed only if I was agonising otherwise I was to 
stay with the rest of Jews.

They gathered us in the court and 16-year-old Arrow Cross boys with armbands 
with skull and crossbones escorted us to the racecourse. Supporting myself with 
my cane it was difficult to walk and they encouraged me that we would see a 
doctor on the racecourse. Naturally, there were no doctors around and we set off 
towards Csomád on foot, where we performed labour service.

Four weeks later, they dismissed all privileged officers and I moved into a so-
called protected house with a Swiss letter of protection. The 4th of December, 
around noon, the Arrow Cross and the police appeared, headed by superintendent 
Tarpataky, if I remember right. They ignored all kinds of letters of protection 
and chased all of us into the street except for the elderly, the sick and 
children. We were waiting in pouring rain in the middle of the courtyard to 
start off. There may have passed as much as a quarter of an hour when a Swiss 
car entered the courtyard and two young men jumped out and stepped to the 
superintendent: You should at least save those who are on this list!  they 
said. I have left enough of them upstairs  and he shrugged his shoulders. 
But we insist!  they answered. The superintendent decided to discuss it with 
the others and consequently he read out 8 names from a list of at least 200 
names. Among the first there was the name of my little daughter, and I was ready 
to sacrifice myself to save her. Slowly, our group left in the direction of 
Teleki Square. The farewell was awful. The staircase was empty because they did 
not allow the people who remained upstairs to come out. My daughter watched us 
from the staircase weeping as we walked out of house. I could hardly say a word. 
I could say with much fatigue only that she should not cry since we would return 
soon. Maybe not even I believed in these words. We marched through the city in 
the dark. One could have escaped but as a soldier I decided to hold out and to 
face what the future held for me. In Teleki Square they separated me from my 
wife and carried me right away to the railway station of Józsefváros together 
with the other men and entrained us immediately. There were 70-75 of us in a 
freight car. We were desperate about the unknown future but later we cared more 
about having a good sitting position.

The journey in Hungary lasted for 6 days. We used the supplies we had taken from 
home but we ran out of it fast. The slow speed of the train was worrying since 
we understood that unless it changed we would have all died of starvation by the 
end. The train stood 2 days in Ács, and after long pleading they allowed us to 
get off. We could get water or food only in return for great sums of money. We 
offered a lot of money to the stationmaster and the drivers if they delayed our 
departure or redirected the train backwards. The idea was that Russians would 
soon cut through the trains route if we passed some more days at a standstill, 
and consequently, they could not have crossed the border with us. The appearance 
of armed Arrow Cross men frustrated our plan. In the meantime, we saw panic-
stricken Germans fleeing, and we continued to cherish some hopes. We also saw as 
German soldiers hurriedly set up the ###.

After # days of very difficult travel we arrived in Hegyeshalom, where we 
crossed the border. Germans took charge of us in Zürndorf, where we got on an 
empty German train. We received a kilo of bread each, margarine and salami for 
the journey. We travelled for another 5-6 days before we arrived in Zelle, the 
railway station of Bergen-Belsen.

The camp was in a distance of 7 kilometres from the station, in the middle of a 
pine-forest. It had tatty barracks with bunkbeds. This camp was a Sonderlager. 
They neither seized our belongings on the way nor did they search us in camp. 
This camp seemed like a little state where Germans were non-existent. There were 
barracks for women and for men, and other barracks where entire families could 
live together. The first occupants were the people who had applied for the first 
two lists of potential emigrants to Palestine. Later, protected companies (of 
labour servicemen) and inhabitants of protected houses came here. The people who 
applied for the first Palestinian list had already left, and we occupied their 
place. The people who stayed here earlier had etched on the bed: We have left 
for Switzerland. They kept encouraging us in a similar way saying that sooner 
or later we would also be transported there. At the beginning, we were in a 
gloomy mood but seeing that there were no atrocities at all we were calmed. The 
only problem was food. In the morning we had coffee, for lunch some soup, in the 
evening we got bread, at the beginning 300 grams for the whole day, together 
with some margarine, cheese and jam. But we could only have a taste of 
everything. However, soon we started to exchange things between each other: food 
for cloth, cigarette for food. The monotony of days was coloured by evening 
lectures. Lukács, who came from the world of theatre and some writers and 
teachers gave us political and scientific lectures in the evenings. There were 
also some entertaining pieces played by amateurs and actors. Our comrade Fischer 
was the author of Communist lectures. I cannot remember how we received news. 
Maybe these political presentations were based purely on our speculations. Life 
could have been even enjoyable if we had had sufficient food and medicine. Very 
many people fell ill because of scarcity of food, especially those who were 
smokers. They exchanged all their rations for tobacco and as a result they got 
some serious nicotine shock or lost all their energy. Once I also had a 
temperature, I got the so-called barracks fever. Comrades already gave up 
hope. I became completely weak; it was difficult for me to make any move. This 
was when we got a charity pack from the International Red Cross. There was 
sugar, chocolate, and ready-made dense soup prepared with flower and fat, which 
was like medicine for the enfeebled heart and for the stomach unaccustomed to 
eating.
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="right_menu">
     <div id="right_menu_content">
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main_hu" href="index.php?showarticle=2031">
        The Holocaust in Hungary
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_1')">
        Perpetrators
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_1">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2011">
          The Gendarmerie
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2012">
          The Police
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2013">
          The Public Administration
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_2')">
        The Gentile Population
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_2">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2014">
          Indifference, Antipathy, Antisemitism
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2015">
          Hungarian Rescuers
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_12')">
        Regions of Destruction
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_12">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2016">
          The Capital: Budapest
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2033">
          A City in the Countryside: Balassagyarmat
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2034">
          A Village: Rákosszentmihály
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_4')">
        Women
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_4">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2017">
          Hungarian Jewish Women in the Kanadakommando
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2018">
          SS Female Overseers in Auschwitz
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2019">
        The First Massacre
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2020">
        Antisemitism
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2021">
        The Jewish Council
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2022">
        Resistance, Zionists
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_9')">
        Death Factory - Auschwitz-Birkenau 1944
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_9">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2023">
          Prisoners' Fate in Auschwitz-Birkenau
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2024">
          SS physicians
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2025">
          What did the Victims know?
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_10')">
        Rescue
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_10">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2026">
          Decent Gendarmes
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2027">
          Policemen
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2028">
          Humane Officials
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2029">
          The Military
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2030">
        Looting
       </a>
      </div>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2032">
       Labour Service
      </a>
      <script>
       toc('menu_12');toc('menu_12');
				if (current!=null) toc(current);
      </script>
     </div>
    </div>
   </div>
   <div id="footer">
   </div>
   <a href="http://degob.hu/index.php" style="text-decoration:none;" title="magyar">
    <div id="switch_banner" title="switch to Hungarian">
     váltás magyarra
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="bphm_banner">
    <a href="http://bphm.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="bphm.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/BPHM_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#1d3c51;font-size:9px;">
      bphm.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <div id="holomo_banner">
    <a href="http://www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/holo_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#5b4b32;font-size:9px;">
      holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <a href="index.php">
    <div id="home">
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="scroller">
    <object align="middle" classid="clsid:d27cdb6e-ae6d-11cf-96b8-444553540000" codebase="http://fpdownload.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=8,0,0,0" height="18" id="scroller" width="927">
     <param name="allowScriptAccess" value="sameDomain"/>
     <param name="movie" value="scroller_en.swf"/>
     <param name="quality" value="high"/>
     <param name="wmode" value="transparent"/>
     <param name="bgcolor" value="#000000"/>
     <embed align="middle" allowscriptaccess="sameDomain" bgcolor="#000000" height="18" name="scroller" pluginspage="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" quality="high" src="scroller_en.swf" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="927" wmode="transparent"/>
    </object>
   </div>
  </div>
  <script src="http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js" type="text/javascript">
  </script>
  <script type="text/javascript">
   _uacct = "UA-316143-2";
urchinTracker();
  </script>
 </body>
</html>
