<html>
 <head>
  <title>
   degob.org
  </title>
  <link href="degob.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
  <script language="JavaScript">
   <!-- Hide the script from old browsers --

	var current;

	function toc(toc_id) {

		toc_element = document.getElementById(toc_id);

		if ((toc_element.style.display=='none')||(toc_element.style.display=='')) {
			toc_element.style.display='block';
		}
		else {
			toc_element.style.display='none';
		}
	}


    // --end hiding here -->
  </script>
 </head>
 <body>
  <div id="wrapper">
   <div id="header">
   </div>
   <div id="main_wrapper">
    <div id="left_menu">
     <div id="left_menu_content">
      <a class="menu_main" href="?extsearch">
       Search
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php">
       Main page
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=203">
       On DEGOB
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2049">
       The Survivor Witnesses
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="?glossary">
       Glossary
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Encylopedia of Camps
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Supporters
      </a>
      <br/>
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="content_container">
     <div id="content">
      <div>
       <div style="float:left;display:inline">
        <h1 style="display:inline">
         Protocol Nr. 3175
        </h1>
       </div>
       <a href="?showjk_img=3175" style="text-decoration:none; color:#453c2d; ">
        <span style="vertical-align:middle; cursor:pointer; float:right; font-size:11px; width:126px; height:17px;  background-image:url('http://degob.hu/images/arrow_l.jpg'); background-repeat:no-repeat; color:#453c2d; font-weight:bold;">
         <span style="padding-left:30px;">
          scanned image
         </span>
        </span>
       </a>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both; margin-bottom:25px;">
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         H. M.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         female
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Szajkofalva
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1926
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Huszt
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         seamstress
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Ghetto
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Huszt (4 hét)
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Camps
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Auschwitz, Salzwedell Belsenberg, Salzwedell
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
      </div>
      <br/>
      <br/>
      The person in question has given us the following information:

I left home, from the ghetto in Huszt, with my parents, my sister and my three 
brothers. 85 of us travelled in a freight car, until Kassa the Hungarian 
gendarmes kept robbing us, and later, when Germans took over, they continued. 
That is how we arrived in Auschwitz after three days of horrible travelling. 
Here everybody was immediately separated from their families, mothers with their 
children went separately from men. Soon, I realised with my sister that only the 
two of us were left of the family, and we did not even have time to say goodbye 
to each other. For most of us this was the final separation, we never saw any of 
these people again. We were taken to some baths where our hair was cut, they 
bathed us and took away the clothes we wore, which were the last things we 
possessed. We were dressed in rags to complete the picture, and we looked so 
ridiculous that we did not know whether to laugh or cry when we looked at each 
other. First, we also got into Camp C, but from there we were taken to Camp B.2, 
where we worked all the time. Our job was to deliver food from one camp to the 
other. Later, 800 of us got into a transport.

65 of us travelled in a freight car, and we got some food as well. After three 
days of travelling we arrived in Bergen-Belsen.

Bergen-Belsen was in a forest, 2 km from Hanover. This camp was called an 
Erholungslager. We hardly arrived when the captain came and selected us. This is 
how all of us moved on to Salzwedel, where we worked in an ammunition factory. 
In the beginning, conditions were tolerable, although the food was very bad. 
Work was hard, but treatment was not the worst. Our camp was clean. We were 
filling bullets in the factory. There were not only Jews here but also prisoners 
from all sorts of nations. We did not have much trouble until the liberation. A 
few weeks before it happened we did not have to work any more, they saw no point 
in it. Later, Germans escaped, only the captain and two German SS women stayed 
with us. When the Americans came in, they killed these two SS women, and we 
saved the captain, because he treated us very well all the time. The Americans 
opened the gates of the camp, and we were really free. I cannot express what 
this meant to us who had spent a whole year in the most horrible captivity.

My future plans: I have met my brother at home, we will wait for my sister and 
we will try to emigrate to Palestine to start our lives over again. We will try 
to forget, and will hopefully manage, but our wounds are still too fresh. All 
the losses we suffered still hurt us.
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="right_menu">
     <div id="right_menu_content">
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main_hu" href="index.php?showarticle=2031">
        The Holocaust in Hungary
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_1')">
        Perpetrators
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_1">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2011">
          The Gendarmerie
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2012">
          The Police
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2013">
          The Public Administration
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_2')">
        The Gentile Population
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_2">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2014">
          Indifference, Antipathy, Antisemitism
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2015">
          Hungarian Rescuers
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_12')">
        Regions of Destruction
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_12">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2016">
          The Capital: Budapest
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2033">
          A City in the Countryside: Balassagyarmat
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2034">
          A Village: Rákosszentmihály
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_4')">
        Women
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_4">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2017">
          Hungarian Jewish Women in the Kanadakommando
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2018">
          SS Female Overseers in Auschwitz
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2019">
        The First Massacre
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2020">
        Antisemitism
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2021">
        The Jewish Council
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2022">
        Resistance, Zionists
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_9')">
        Death Factory - Auschwitz-Birkenau 1944
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_9">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2023">
          Prisoners' Fate in Auschwitz-Birkenau
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2024">
          SS physicians
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2025">
          What did the Victims know?
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_10')">
        Rescue
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_10">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2026">
          Decent Gendarmes
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2027">
          Policemen
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2028">
          Humane Officials
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2029">
          The Military
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2030">
        Looting
       </a>
      </div>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2032">
       Labour Service
      </a>
      <script>
       toc('menu_12');toc('menu_12');
				if (current!=null) toc(current);
      </script>
     </div>
    </div>
   </div>
   <div id="footer">
   </div>
   <a href="http://degob.hu/index.php" style="text-decoration:none;" title="magyar">
    <div id="switch_banner" title="switch to Hungarian">
     váltás magyarra
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="bphm_banner">
    <a href="http://bphm.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="bphm.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/BPHM_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#1d3c51;font-size:9px;">
      bphm.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <div id="holomo_banner">
    <a href="http://www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/holo_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#5b4b32;font-size:9px;">
      holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <a href="index.php">
    <div id="home">
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="scroller">
    <object align="middle" classid="clsid:d27cdb6e-ae6d-11cf-96b8-444553540000" codebase="http://fpdownload.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=8,0,0,0" height="18" id="scroller" width="927">
     <param name="allowScriptAccess" value="sameDomain"/>
     <param name="movie" value="scroller_en.swf"/>
     <param name="quality" value="high"/>
     <param name="wmode" value="transparent"/>
     <param name="bgcolor" value="#000000"/>
     <embed align="middle" allowscriptaccess="sameDomain" bgcolor="#000000" height="18" name="scroller" pluginspage="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" quality="high" src="scroller_en.swf" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="927" wmode="transparent"/>
    </object>
   </div>
  </div>
  <script src="http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js" type="text/javascript">
  </script>
  <script type="text/javascript">
   _uacct = "UA-316143-2";
urchinTracker();
  </script>
 </body>
</html>
