<html>
 <head>
  <title>
   degob.org
  </title>
  <link href="degob.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
  <script language="JavaScript">
   <!-- Hide the script from old browsers --

	var current;

	function toc(toc_id) {

		toc_element = document.getElementById(toc_id);

		if ((toc_element.style.display=='none')||(toc_element.style.display=='')) {
			toc_element.style.display='block';
		}
		else {
			toc_element.style.display='none';
		}
	}


    // --end hiding here -->
  </script>
 </head>
 <body>
  <div id="wrapper">
   <div id="header">
   </div>
   <div id="main_wrapper">
    <div id="left_menu">
     <div id="left_menu_content">
      <a class="menu_main" href="?extsearch">
       Search
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php">
       Main page
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=203">
       On DEGOB
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2049">
       The Survivor Witnesses
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="?glossary">
       Glossary
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Encylopedia of Camps
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Supporters
      </a>
      <br/>
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="content_container">
     <div id="content">
      <div>
       <div style="float:left;display:inline">
        <h1 style="display:inline">
         Protocol Nr. 180
        </h1>
       </div>
       <a href="?showjk_img=180" style="text-decoration:none; color:#453c2d; ">
        <span style="vertical-align:middle; cursor:pointer; float:right; font-size:11px; width:126px; height:17px;  background-image:url('http://degob.hu/images/arrow_l.jpg'); background-repeat:no-repeat; color:#453c2d; font-weight:bold;">
         <span style="padding-left:30px;">
          scanned image
         </span>
        </span>
       </a>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both; margin-bottom:25px;">
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         S. E.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         female
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Beregszász
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1923
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Beregszász
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Red Cross nurse
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Camps
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Auschwitz, Rawensbrück, Neustadt
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
      </div>
      <br/>
      <br/>
      The person in question has given us the following information:

The 15,000 Jewish inhabitants of Beregszász engaged both in 
artisanship and trade, and by and large they were all right 
financially. My parents had 750 acres of lands, 12 acres of 
vineyards, 7 houses, and a clothes shop, so we lived pretty well. 
I had a single brother. Thank God, yesterday I managed to see him 
again here in Budapest, while my beloved parents have not turned 
up yet.	

The 19th of March 1944, when the Germans invaded the country, my 
father, one of the richest men in town, was taken hostage and was 
kept in detention till deportation. During this time he had to 
endure much beating. They frequently searched houses. Germans 
searched our house and shop from the attic to the cellar, and 
seized a lot of clothes also from our clothes shop. During this 
time my mother was in a sanatorium in Budapest, but using my 
connections I managed to have her carried home. In this period I 
worked in the Town Hospital as an orderly; I had a degree as a 
nurse of the Red Cross. I also lived in hospital during this time, 
and used to visit my mother (and father) in the ghetto, bringing 
them whatever I could.

The infamous anti-Semite Mayor of town was Kálmán Hubay, who 
published the decrees while the police of the town made sure 
people respected them. After Easter, around the middle of April, 
they started to move the Jewish population into the brick factory, 
the ghetto. I managed to attain that my mother was put only in the 
last transport. As I have said, I lived in the hospital and got to 
know the life in the ghetto only through what I heard during my 
visits. There was a soup kitchen in the ghetto but my family ate 
the food they had brought from home. One morning, gendarmes 
surrounded the ghetto and searched for money, jewellery and 
valuables. Several people managed to escape like my cousin Dávid 
Klein, who also managed to run away. Hungarian policemen, and 
later military gendarmes guarded the ghetto, while Jewish 
policemen kept order inside. Members of the Jewish Council were 
Kesztenbaum, Schwartz, who were nice; there was no complaint 
against their work. There were around 15,000 Jews kept in the 
ghetto. Germans asked for younger women to do some work, like 
cleaning their flats, but also men worked inside the ghetto.

The 16th of May, on a Wednesday morning at 9 oclock, I got the 
news on the phone that my mother had been entrained and my father 
wanted to talk to me. We were having a serious operation but when 
it was over I ran into the ghetto. I saw my parents looking out of 
the window of the freight car. My father had been badly beaten up 
and looked now 20 years older than before captivity. He reassured 
me that I did not need to keep with them, he only wanted to say 
farewell to me but I felt obliged to share good and bad times with 
my parents, and asked the gendarme lieutenant to let me get in 
their car. The lieutenant said the train was heading towards 
Kecskemét, where there was going to be another ghetto and I could 
work in the hospital of that ghetto. I ran back to the hospital 
and asked for some documents and ran to fetch my graduation 
diploma as I thought I might use it at some point. I got on the 
car where my parents stayed but earlier I was thoroughly searched. 
I was undressed completely and they grabbed all my documents and 
tore them up in front of my eyes. When I wanted to keep the 
graduation diploma the military gendarme gave me a big kick. There 
were around 90 people crammed in the car. We had water only until 
Kassa; later we did not get any. The freight car was opened the 
first time in Kassa. Entrainment happened the following way: the 
day before, the camp leader was summoned and they ordered him to 
prepare certain families for entrainment. Our transport was the 
second one. It was baking hot in the cars. Two old gentlemen did 
not endure it and died. Hungarian soldiers and military gendarmes 
escorted us till Kassa, where Germans took charge of the train. I 
do not know of anyone trying to escape on the way.
The 20th of May 1944, we arrived in Auschwitz at night after four 
days of travel. The ill-famed Dr Mengele and Polish men in striped 
clothes received us at the railway station. They separated men and 
also selected younger women fit for work and sent them to the 
right side, while the rest were sent to the left side. After a 
relatively long walk we arrived to the baths. They cut our hair 
off: when the SS soldier passed the line of naked women and got to 
me he took my hair, rolled it around his finger and said it was a 
pity to cut it off as it was nice. After the bath we got a single 
garment without underwear; they had seized also our shoes. I got 
into Camp A, barrack 7, where there were around 1,100 of us. This 
was decidedly an extermination camp. I stayed in quarantine for 
three weeks and managed to appeal to the block leader, and she 
recommended me for a tattoo. From here I went to work to Brezinka 
(Kanada), where the luggage that transports of people brought here 
were managed. The building of a crematorium was around 2-3 metres 
from here. I saw arriving transports of people entering it, I saw 
them being undressed: a lot of old, sick, pregnant women, mothers 
with young children. I also witnessed as they undressed them in 
the courtyard and told them that they were going to enter the 
baths. I often heard them screaming. There was not enough room in 
the crematorium to burn people and I saw them burning dead bodies 
on piles of fire. We constantly felt the stink of bones and flesh. 
When the crematorium stopped functioning we went in to look 
around. As a nurse I was particularly interested. There was a 
little lobby with several doors. One of the doors led to the 
crematorium, into the oven, another door to the gas chamber. The 
crematorium itself was a huge hall with white tiles, washbasins 
fitted in the wall, showers and even mirrors.

Selections were frequent in the spring and the autumn. When they 
did the selections there were always block curfews: no one could 
leave the blocks, while people were collected and lined up. Later, 
a car came and they selected the old, the people who were unable 
to walk, and the sick, and threw them on a truck naked. I saw once 
when my grandmother and other relatives were taken away.

We had to line up for Appell (roll call) twice a day: in the 
morning and the evening. We were woken up at dawn and had to stand 
for hours in the yard in rain, snow and in scorching heat, while 
our bald heads were uncovered.

Daily rations were one quarter of a loaf of bread, soup, and some 
jam and margarine as Zulag.

In September, I fell ill, went to hospital and remained there till 
the 18th of January, 1945. We went from here to look around in the 
crematorium after it stopped functioning.

On the 16th of January 1945, we left for Ravensbrück on foot. We 
received no food for the journey so we were reduced to eating snow 
on the way. The ca. 85 kilometres long journey lasted for two days 
and a night. Ravensbrück is in the direction of Hamburg. Later, we 
got on the train, though it was a train with open wagons and 150 
people were crammed into each of them. The journey in open wagons 
lasted for four days. We were so hungry that we collected and ate 
the snow from each others shoulders. We were already completely 
enfeebled when we arrived in Ravensbrück. I spent around two weeks 
here lodged in some blocks before they transferred me with a 
transport to Neustadt, close to Hamburg. We did the journey in 
third-class carriages and got around one twentieth of a loaf of 
bread and some Zulag for a day. In Neustadt our rations got much 
worse. We received only one tenth of a loaf of bread and 4 
decilitres of soup, which was cooked of turnips without any salt. 
Besides, we got once a week one quarter of a kilo of margarine cut 
into 35 pieces. There were at least 85 people in the block so we 
could only sleep in turns. We were full of lice and could hardly 
work. 100-120 people died every day; we were exhausted. We could 
not even stand during roll calls. When the Lagerälteste came I 
stood up fast. People kept falling during roll calls.
The 2nd of May 1945, Russian troops liberated us. We went to 
Neustadt, and we got from them all the nice and good things one 
can imagine. For example, once they brought us an entire pig that 
was shot. I worked also here as a nurse, and came by a car of the 
Red Cross. Later, I spent two weeks in Neubrandenburg. The trip to 
Prague, for which 60 big cars were dispensed to us, lasted two 
days and a night. It seemed almost exaggerated how they treated 
deported people in Prague. All hotels, theatres, cinemas were open 
to us, and people gave us money in the street. I arrived in 
Budapest via Pozsony.

My future plans: Now, I will go home to look round, and then I 
will matriculate at the medical university of Prague. All that I 
want is to be a useful member of society as a doctor.
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="right_menu">
     <div id="right_menu_content">
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main_hu" href="index.php?showarticle=2031">
        The Holocaust in Hungary
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_1')">
        Perpetrators
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_1">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2011">
          The Gendarmerie
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2012">
          The Police
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2013">
          The Public Administration
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_2')">
        The Gentile Population
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_2">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2014">
          Indifference, Antipathy, Antisemitism
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2015">
          Hungarian Rescuers
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_12')">
        Regions of Destruction
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_12">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2016">
          The Capital: Budapest
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2033">
          A City in the Countryside: Balassagyarmat
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2034">
          A Village: Rákosszentmihály
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_4')">
        Women
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_4">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2017">
          Hungarian Jewish Women in the Kanadakommando
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2018">
          SS Female Overseers in Auschwitz
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2019">
        The First Massacre
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2020">
        Antisemitism
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2021">
        The Jewish Council
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2022">
        Resistance, Zionists
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_9')">
        Death Factory - Auschwitz-Birkenau 1944
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_9">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2023">
          Prisoners' Fate in Auschwitz-Birkenau
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2024">
          SS physicians
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2025">
          What did the Victims know?
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_10')">
        Rescue
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_10">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2026">
          Decent Gendarmes
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2027">
          Policemen
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2028">
          Humane Officials
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2029">
          The Military
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2030">
        Looting
       </a>
      </div>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2032">
       Labour Service
      </a>
      <script>
       toc('menu_12');toc('menu_12');
				if (current!=null) toc(current);
      </script>
     </div>
    </div>
   </div>
   <div id="footer">
   </div>
   <a href="http://degob.hu/index.php" style="text-decoration:none;" title="magyar">
    <div id="switch_banner" title="switch to Hungarian">
     váltás magyarra
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="bphm_banner">
    <a href="http://bphm.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="bphm.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/BPHM_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#1d3c51;font-size:9px;">
      bphm.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <div id="holomo_banner">
    <a href="http://www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/holo_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#5b4b32;font-size:9px;">
      holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <a href="index.php">
    <div id="home">
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="scroller">
    <object align="middle" classid="clsid:d27cdb6e-ae6d-11cf-96b8-444553540000" codebase="http://fpdownload.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=8,0,0,0" height="18" id="scroller" width="927">
     <param name="allowScriptAccess" value="sameDomain"/>
     <param name="movie" value="scroller_en.swf"/>
     <param name="quality" value="high"/>
     <param name="wmode" value="transparent"/>
     <param name="bgcolor" value="#000000"/>
     <embed align="middle" allowscriptaccess="sameDomain" bgcolor="#000000" height="18" name="scroller" pluginspage="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" quality="high" src="scroller_en.swf" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="927" wmode="transparent"/>
    </object>
   </div>
  </div>
  <script src="http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js" type="text/javascript">
  </script>
  <script type="text/javascript">
   _uacct = "UA-316143-2";
urchinTracker();
  </script>
 </body>
</html>
