<html>
 <head>
  <title>
   degob.org
  </title>
  <link href="degob.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
  <script language="JavaScript">
   <!-- Hide the script from old browsers --

	var current;

	function toc(toc_id) {

		toc_element = document.getElementById(toc_id);

		if ((toc_element.style.display=='none')||(toc_element.style.display=='')) {
			toc_element.style.display='block';
		}
		else {
			toc_element.style.display='none';
		}
	}


    // --end hiding here -->
  </script>
 </head>
 <body>
  <div id="wrapper">
   <div id="header">
   </div>
   <div id="main_wrapper">
    <div id="left_menu">
     <div id="left_menu_content">
      <a class="menu_main" href="?extsearch">
       Search
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php">
       Main page
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=203">
       On DEGOB
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2049">
       The Survivor Witnesses
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="?glossary">
       Glossary
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Encylopedia of Camps
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Supporters
      </a>
      <br/>
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="content_container">
     <div id="content">
      <div>
       <div style="float:left;display:inline">
        <h1 style="display:inline">
         Protocol Nr. 136
        </h1>
       </div>
       <a href="?showjk_img=136" style="text-decoration:none; color:#453c2d; ">
        <span style="vertical-align:middle; cursor:pointer; float:right; font-size:11px; width:126px; height:17px;  background-image:url('http://degob.hu/images/arrow_l.jpg'); background-repeat:no-repeat; color:#453c2d; font-weight:bold;">
         <span style="padding-left:30px;">
          scanned image
         </span>
        </span>
       </a>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both; margin-bottom:25px;">
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         K. K.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         female
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1917
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Budapest
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         goldsmith
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Camps
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Bergen - Belsen, Ragu, Theresienstadt
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         F. M.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         female
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1917
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Budapest
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         housewife
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Camps
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Bergen - Belsen, Ragu, Theresienstadt
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
      </div>
      <br/>
      <br/>
      The persons in question have given us the following information:

In November 1944, the Szálasi government was already on the rampage in the 
country and especially in Budapest. I lived in a starred house with my parents 
and brothers and sisters. Searching houses was already habitual. At night 
policemen, soldiers and Arrow Cross men would come either separately or 
together, they would claim they were looking for weapons or broadcasting 
stations and would steal whatever they found and liked. Together with the loot 
they picked also one or two Jews. Every evening we lay down with terror as we 
did not know what would happen during the night, and we were also scared of the 
following day, of the unpleasant happenings it was going to bring about. We were 
scared to look out the window as everyday there was a new placard that concerned 
us, which curbed our human rights and humiliated us. It happened that we could 
not leave the house for days. Other days when someone would go out in the 
permitted time span he or she would never return. We knew that we could not go 
on staying like this for long but we did not know how the villains would come 
down on us. One day at dawn, Arrow Cross men appeared in the house and collected 
all men younger than 60. They were taken into Germany and to date only a very 
small fraction of them has returned.
The 6th of November, at 6 am, the Arrow Cross and the police came back and now 
they took away all women between the age of 18 and 60. I was also among them. 
They led us into a brick factory, which lay in the neighbourhood of Budapest 
three hours walk from the centre. In order to torture us all the more we had to 
walk so slow in pouring autumn rain standing sometimes for hours in the same 
place that we arrived in the factory only by 10 pm. We walked in an awful 
terror. In the brick factory the Arrow Cross beat up people. They seized wedding 
rings, watches, jewellery and money. We stayed here for 24 hours. We could have 
eaten what we had taken from home but we were not able to eat because of 
anxiety. Finally, delegates of the Swiss Embassy arrived and freed everyone who 
had a letter of protection, and lodged us in a Swiss protected house, in the so-
called international ghetto.
A few days later, the Arrow Cross invaded also this protected house and 
randomly singled out people - among them also me. They took us into a building 
in Teleki Square No. 3, and entrained us a week later. There were 70 people in a 
freight car, and we had already finished our food, and brought no food with us. 
They did not put in the car water or a bucket. We got 30-40 grams of bread but 
not every day. We travelled for 19 days under these horrible circumstances; back 
from Germany into Austria and Hungary, and again back into Germany, since they 
did not want to accept us in any of the places. First, they opened the doors in 
Vienna. On the way two people died; it was horrible to travel together with two 
corpses. When finally we arrived in Bergen-Belsen we could get off car only on 
all fours because we had become so enfeebled.
In Bergen-Belsen they disinfected us and cut the hair off. They grabbed our 
clothes and gave us striped clothes. We were crammed into a single barrack. 
There were three beds one above the other and 19-20 slept in a bed. We slept on 
the floor without covers. If someone went out during the night she had to find 
her way crossing our bodies. One night one of the top beds fell off. Several 
people were crushed. We could not light the room and there was panic, people 
started screaming. Hearing the clamour an SS soldier entered and blind in the 
dark started giving blows with the baton hitting everyone he reached. The most 
awful experience had been when we arrived and had to take off all our clothes. 
If someone wanted to keep on a piece of cloth he or she was beaten up with a dog 
whip. After a hot bath we had to stand nude in the snow for hours and wait till 
they brought us clothes, our new striped dresses. They shoved the clothes at us 
but we could not put them on; we had to carry them in our hands and walk nude 
and barefoot in that terrible cold towards our barrack.
I will never forget the image of an elderly woman, who was unable to stand 
during Appell, being beaten with a dog whip.
Bergen-Belsen was a horrible camp. That time it was already full of people sick 
with typhus. There was no water; we could not wash our bodies or clothes. All of 
us got lice and they probably made me suffer more than hunger. Vans full of 
cadavers kept going towards the crematorium and the constant smell above the 
camp was horrible.
Later, we were taken into Raguhn, which was a camp for labourers, and we worked 
12 hours a day for an aircraft factory. The work itself was not very hard but 
working hours were extremely long and rations very little. We only got 200 grams 
of bread and half a litre of soup a day. The camp was anyway relatively clean, 
without lice, and we slept in a heated place. However, several people fell ill 
with typhus also here, and no one cared about the sick. Great numbers of people 
died also here. When the Americans got closer they put us again in freight cars 
and now we travelled for 8 days. For two days we got nothing to eat, later 
sometimes a little bit of bread. As it has been demonstrated Germans had 
poisoned the food and bread.
Finally, we arrived in Theresienstadt where Russians liberated us two days 
later.
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="right_menu">
     <div id="right_menu_content">
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main_hu" href="index.php?showarticle=2031">
        The Holocaust in Hungary
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_1')">
        Perpetrators
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_1">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2011">
          The Gendarmerie
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2012">
          The Police
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2013">
          The Public Administration
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_2')">
        The Gentile Population
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_2">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2014">
          Indifference, Antipathy, Antisemitism
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2015">
          Hungarian Rescuers
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_12')">
        Regions of Destruction
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_12">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2016">
          The Capital: Budapest
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2033">
          A City in the Countryside: Balassagyarmat
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2034">
          A Village: Rákosszentmihály
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_4')">
        Women
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_4">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2017">
          Hungarian Jewish Women in the Kanadakommando
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2018">
          SS Female Overseers in Auschwitz
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2019">
        The First Massacre
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2020">
        Antisemitism
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2021">
        The Jewish Council
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2022">
        Resistance, Zionists
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_9')">
        Death Factory - Auschwitz-Birkenau 1944
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_9">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2023">
          Prisoners' Fate in Auschwitz-Birkenau
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2024">
          SS physicians
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2025">
          What did the Victims know?
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_10')">
        Rescue
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_10">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2026">
          Decent Gendarmes
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2027">
          Policemen
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2028">
          Humane Officials
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2029">
          The Military
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2030">
        Looting
       </a>
      </div>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2032">
       Labour Service
      </a>
      <script>
       toc('menu_12');toc('menu_12');
				if (current!=null) toc(current);
      </script>
     </div>
    </div>
   </div>
   <div id="footer">
   </div>
   <a href="http://degob.hu/index.php" style="text-decoration:none;" title="magyar">
    <div id="switch_banner" title="switch to Hungarian">
     váltás magyarra
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="bphm_banner">
    <a href="http://bphm.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="bphm.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/BPHM_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#1d3c51;font-size:9px;">
      bphm.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <div id="holomo_banner">
    <a href="http://www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/holo_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#5b4b32;font-size:9px;">
      holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <a href="index.php">
    <div id="home">
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="scroller">
    <object align="middle" classid="clsid:d27cdb6e-ae6d-11cf-96b8-444553540000" codebase="http://fpdownload.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=8,0,0,0" height="18" id="scroller" width="927">
     <param name="allowScriptAccess" value="sameDomain"/>
     <param name="movie" value="scroller_en.swf"/>
     <param name="quality" value="high"/>
     <param name="wmode" value="transparent"/>
     <param name="bgcolor" value="#000000"/>
     <embed align="middle" allowscriptaccess="sameDomain" bgcolor="#000000" height="18" name="scroller" pluginspage="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" quality="high" src="scroller_en.swf" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="927" wmode="transparent"/>
    </object>
   </div>
  </div>
  <script src="http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js" type="text/javascript">
  </script>
  <script type="text/javascript">
   _uacct = "UA-316143-2";
urchinTracker();
  </script>
 </body>
</html>
