<html>
 <head>
  <title>
   degob.org
  </title>
  <link href="degob.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
  <script language="JavaScript">
   <!-- Hide the script from old browsers --

	var current;

	function toc(toc_id) {

		toc_element = document.getElementById(toc_id);

		if ((toc_element.style.display=='none')||(toc_element.style.display=='')) {
			toc_element.style.display='block';
		}
		else {
			toc_element.style.display='none';
		}
	}


    // --end hiding here -->
  </script>
 </head>
 <body>
  <div id="wrapper">
   <div id="header">
   </div>
   <div id="main_wrapper">
    <div id="left_menu">
     <div id="left_menu_content">
      <a class="menu_main" href="?extsearch">
       Search
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php">
       Main page
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=203">
       On DEGOB
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2049">
       The Survivor Witnesses
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="?glossary">
       Glossary
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Encylopedia of Camps
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Supporters
      </a>
      <br/>
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="content_container">
     <div id="content">
      <div>
       <div style="float:left;display:inline">
        <h1 style="display:inline">
         Protocol Nr. 182
        </h1>
       </div>
       <a href="?showjk_img=182" style="text-decoration:none; color:#453c2d; ">
        <span style="vertical-align:middle; cursor:pointer; float:right; font-size:11px; width:126px; height:17px;  background-image:url('http://degob.hu/images/arrow_l.jpg'); background-repeat:no-repeat; color:#453c2d; font-weight:bold;">
         <span style="padding-left:30px;">
          scanned image
         </span>
        </span>
       </a>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both; margin-bottom:25px;">
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         R. B.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         female
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Aknasugatag
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1913
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Aknasugatag
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         electrician and mechanic
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Ghetto
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Bártfalva
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Camps
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Auschwitz, Janina, Birkenau, Monowitz, Landeshut, Grossrosen, Landeshut
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
      </div>
      <br/>
      <br/>
      The person in question has given us the following information:

The number of Jews in Aknasugatag was 140. They were tradesmen, craftsmen, 
tailors, and cobblers, who had no financial problems. Our life was particularly 
easy since we had a mill, a house on our own, a shop and also lands.

As a labour serviceman I returned from Russia exactly when Germans entered the 
country. There were many people of the Arrow Cross in our place who incited 
others against us. Few people felt sorry for Jews and these were mostly 
Romanians. Quite a famous doctor of Aknasugatag Dr. Wiener had an unfortunate 
fate. He was a general doctor of great abilities visited by patients from 
faraway towns. Even men of the Arrow Cross appreciated his talents and wanted to 
keep him home but at the end they deported him. He was a short, fat and 
physically very sensitive man. In Auschwitz they took his shoes off and sent him 
to Monowitz barefoot, while the SS beat him on the way. In Moniwitz at the gate 
of the camp he died in a heart attack.

When they seized all our possessions in Aknasugatag they took us ten kilometres 
away to Bártfalva with an escort of gendarmes.

In the ghetto of Bártfalva we lived under awful conditions. The leader of the 
ghetto, who was a sergeant, beat girls and men. They entered the houses to 
assault us during the night. Every day he collected different kinds of food in 
the ghetto for himself: eggs, sugar, etc.

Three or four weeks later we were forced to walk to Máramarossziget. This trip 
belongs to my worst memories. This horrible march  of which I was also a part - 
reminded me of Jud Süss. There were around two thousands of us: women, children, 
and everyone with a big colourful sack on the back. A train arrived and I met 
several people I knew and who all loved me and felt sorry to see me in this 
situation. There were more than one Christians who wanted to hide me and 
promised to feed me till this situation lasted. But I wanted to share the fate 
of my parents and my older sister, and I could not leave behind her two 
beautiful children. Unfortunately, I have lost all of them.

The day after, we left behind the ghetto of Sziget as they moved us into a 
temple where they grabbed all our belongings apart from some food.

They gathered us in another temple, where they locked us so we could not even go 
out to the toilet or to drink. They deported us from here in German freight 
cars. We did not know where we were heading. We made guesses. Many claimed we 
were taken for agricultural work to West Hungary. I suspected what would happen 
but did not want to dash their hopes. The others got scared only when the train 
started heading towards Kassa. The train arrived in Birkenau at 11 pm. We asked 
for some water from the Polish boys who were standing next to the train but they 
said: "Why do you want water when anyway you will be burnt?! Several of the 
women started to sob and cry. These were nerve-wracking and harrowing minutes. 
Everyone shoved his or her belongings and lost all their courage. We had to pass 
one by one in front of Scharführer Mengele in a long queue. He just nodded with 
his head: to the right or to the left. A nod like that meant life or death. 
Already in the freight car we heard the terrible cry of women and children being 
chased by whips to the ditches. We got to know that there were six crematoria 
but these were insufficient for killing so many people so they dug huge ditches 
made immense fire in them and threw in people alive. When it happened they 
turned off the lights and put on the alarm so that they could handle their 
victims easier in the chaos. We got terribly frightened. We said a prayer and 
prepared ourselves for death. At selection also the rabbi of Suhatag was 
separated from his wife and 10 children but he walked to his family and died 
together with them.

First, we were led into the baths. It was here that I got the first slap from a 
Polish Capo because I dared to ask for water. They cut the hair off, and 
depilated us. 15 barbers were at work. They grabbed all our clothes. Suddenly we 
noticed that they brought a great quantity of clothes and I recognised the 
clothes of my mother, older sister and her children. I was seized with a 
horrible feeling as I understood what it meant to see the clothes of my loved 
ones. When we finished with the baths we got the dress of prisoners. We were put 
up in a block where 8 people lay on the same wooden bunk.

Four days later, they took us into Auschwitz. From there we went to Janina by 
cars a few days later. Here we shovelled coal in a mine moving 15 kilos heavy 
shovels. Hunger and cold made our suffering greater.

The 10th of August 1944, I was transported to Birkenau as an electrician. I 
worked in the crematorium. I arrived when the most modern one of the six 
crematoria was just being renovated. I did the work of an electrician. The 
crematorium was closed: painters, electricians, bricklayers and carpenters 
worked in it. It looked the following way: victims first entered a lobby. It was 
a nice clean room with painted country sceneries and other pictures on the 
walls. The door of the changing room opened from here. Notes warned the entering 
people to keep the place clean. All around the wall there were numbered cloths 
hangers. There was a big note on the wall saying that everyone should remember 
the number of the hanger where they hanged their clothes, because numerous 
people wanted to have a bath. The next room was the bath with 600 places. There 
were four lines of showers. Instead of water gas flew of the taps. If they had 
sufficient time, people got first gassed but if there were many transports and 
they had to burn a lot of people at the same time and had no time for gassing 
them the floor simply turned and people fell in the fire alive. The floor had an 
invisible metal axis, which was made to function by electricity. The switch was 
pushed by an SS-man who stayed close in a cabin.

If he pushed one of the switches the floor turned in an upright position and the 
victims slid on a conveyor belt that was invisible before, which carried them 
into the crematorium.

I worked here in a Sonderkommando (special Kommando) that had 200 members, 
mostly Polish men. One day they learnt that they were going to kill us soon, 
too. As there was nothing to lose they decided to counter the SS with arms. The 
way they got hold of weapons will always remain a secret to me. They threw three 
SS-men into the fire of the neighbouring crematorium, while they killed four 
others. They tore them into pieces in front of my eyes. 40 of them could manage 
to get away the rest were captured. I ran into another block. In Birkenau, in 
this Sonderkommando we had a great quantity of gold and silver, which had no 
value, no one wanted it. Food was first class.

Once a son of a Transylvanian rabbi was also selected for the Sonderkommando. He 
refused to work here and ran against the electric wires and got shot by the SS.

The next camp was Monowitz, where we worked for the plant of I. G. 
Farbenindustria Buna. I worked in a Kommando of 170 people as a high voltage 
electrician. We controlled the transformers of the neighbouring area in a 
walking distances of 10-15 kilometres and did the electric works of air raid 
shelters.
The camp was evacuated the 18th of January, 1945. 12,000 people were taken away 
from here and we did know where we heading. The people who could not walk were 
simply shot and left dead in the middle of the road. At the beginning, they did 
the same also in towns but later they forced us to carry the people who could 
not walk out of town and they slaughtered them later. We crossed Batibor, Glatz, 
and Waldenburg. German Capos gave us only the eighths of a loaf of bread instead 
of the fourth, what was due. When we were so weak that we could hardly walk we 
rebelled against the SS. Consequently, they beat everyone hard with clubs. I 
still wear its sign on my head; the hair does not grow there. We did not get 
food, and if sometimes we got something the Capos stole it and swapped it for 
cigarettes.

When we arrived in Landeshut, I escaped together with two of my companions. A 
comrade of mine told me later in Pest that others continued to walk on for 43 
days, 30-40 kilometres a day, by the end only 300 survived out of a group of 
3,000.

After the escape the first thing I did was make the number on my arm disappear 
but I did not consider that the wound would remain visible. Six days later, we 
went to the house of a German and asked for food. While we were eating he left 
and denounced us to the SS. We were thin and pale and he realised we were 
prisoners. We did not have to wait much to be captured by three SS men who took 
us into the camp of Landeshut. The Lagerrälteste gave my companions immediately 
a fatal blow. I was saved by the fact that I was an electrician. We worked till 
4 pm and would receive lunch and dinner at the same time after we returned home. 
The worst part of the day started only now: they would give us the order to look 
for lice since there was no disinfecting here. We were tired, nervous, and 
depressed and had to start looking for lice. An hour later that we finished an 
SS man controlled us with a torch. He called our numbers and we had to appear in 
front of him and if he found more than two lice on the shirt or the underwear he 
gave us as many strikes with a rubber crop as the number of lice he had 
discovered. Our job was anyway the same also here: we had to dig trenches 
because Russians stayed in a distance of 40 kilometres for three months.

We left this place for Grossrosen. It was also in Silesia # kilometres from 
Landeshut. Here we suffered the most of dirt. There was neither a bathroom nor a 
proper place for sleeping. We slept three of us in a bed, and of course lice 
spread even faster. So we had to go on looking for lice.

In the meantime electricians of Landeshut wanted to get away and as they were 
shot I had to replace them in Landeshut. The Lagerrälteste drunk together with 
the SS and during this revelries in the night he often came into our bedrooms, 
selected 5-6 people and took them up where they were drinking and shot them 
because of sadism. Once I was also selected and taken away. As he did it with 
everyone he asked about my profession. I replied I was an electrician and would 
repair his lighter if needed. He came back with a lighter and declared that I 
had an hour to fix it otherwise I had to face a dim future. Naturally, I fixed 
it and from this time on I did not go out working but fixed lighters. Later, I 
constructed an electric disinfecting device. During this period my life got 
better, I had a lot to eat.

Meanwhile, the others dug trenches around town, as the Russian was getting 
closer.

I have to note that I was the only Jew in Landeshut; and also in Grossrosen the 
proportion of Jews was at the most 10 percentages. The rest were convicts and 
political prisoners.
The most awful days for me were the last ones in Landeshut since the Polish Capo 
decided to do me in within two weeks. He would beat me every day, would push me 
on ground and kick me in the ribs. He managed to break two of my ribs. My life 
was saved by the liberating Russian troops.

My goal is to leave Europe at any price. As an old Zionist I hope that I manage 
to get to Palestine.
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="right_menu">
     <div id="right_menu_content">
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main_hu" href="index.php?showarticle=2031">
        The Holocaust in Hungary
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_1')">
        Perpetrators
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_1">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2011">
          The Gendarmerie
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2012">
          The Police
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2013">
          The Public Administration
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_2')">
        The Gentile Population
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_2">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2014">
          Indifference, Antipathy, Antisemitism
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2015">
          Hungarian Rescuers
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_12')">
        Regions of Destruction
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_12">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2016">
          The Capital: Budapest
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2033">
          A City in the Countryside: Balassagyarmat
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2034">
          A Village: Rákosszentmihály
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_4')">
        Women
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_4">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2017">
          Hungarian Jewish Women in the Kanadakommando
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2018">
          SS Female Overseers in Auschwitz
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2019">
        The First Massacre
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2020">
        Antisemitism
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2021">
        The Jewish Council
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2022">
        Resistance, Zionists
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_9')">
        Death Factory - Auschwitz-Birkenau 1944
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_9">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2023">
          Prisoners' Fate in Auschwitz-Birkenau
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2024">
          SS physicians
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2025">
          What did the Victims know?
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_10')">
        Rescue
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_10">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2026">
          Decent Gendarmes
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2027">
          Policemen
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2028">
          Humane Officials
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2029">
          The Military
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2030">
        Looting
       </a>
      </div>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2032">
       Labour Service
      </a>
      <script>
       toc('menu_12');toc('menu_12');
				if (current!=null) toc(current);
      </script>
     </div>
    </div>
   </div>
   <div id="footer">
   </div>
   <a href="http://degob.hu/index.php" style="text-decoration:none;" title="magyar">
    <div id="switch_banner" title="switch to Hungarian">
     váltás magyarra
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="bphm_banner">
    <a href="http://bphm.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="bphm.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/BPHM_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#1d3c51;font-size:9px;">
      bphm.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <div id="holomo_banner">
    <a href="http://www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/holo_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#5b4b32;font-size:9px;">
      holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <a href="index.php">
    <div id="home">
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="scroller">
    <object align="middle" classid="clsid:d27cdb6e-ae6d-11cf-96b8-444553540000" codebase="http://fpdownload.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=8,0,0,0" height="18" id="scroller" width="927">
     <param name="allowScriptAccess" value="sameDomain"/>
     <param name="movie" value="scroller_en.swf"/>
     <param name="quality" value="high"/>
     <param name="wmode" value="transparent"/>
     <param name="bgcolor" value="#000000"/>
     <embed align="middle" allowscriptaccess="sameDomain" bgcolor="#000000" height="18" name="scroller" pluginspage="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" quality="high" src="scroller_en.swf" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="927" wmode="transparent"/>
    </object>
   </div>
  </div>
  <script src="http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js" type="text/javascript">
  </script>
  <script type="text/javascript">
   _uacct = "UA-316143-2";
urchinTracker();
  </script>
 </body>
</html>
