<html>
 <head>
  <title>
   degob.org
  </title>
  <link href="degob.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
  <script language="JavaScript">
   <!-- Hide the script from old browsers --

	var current;

	function toc(toc_id) {

		toc_element = document.getElementById(toc_id);

		if ((toc_element.style.display=='none')||(toc_element.style.display=='')) {
			toc_element.style.display='block';
		}
		else {
			toc_element.style.display='none';
		}
	}


    // --end hiding here -->
  </script>
 </head>
 <body>
  <div id="wrapper">
   <div id="header">
   </div>
   <div id="main_wrapper">
    <div id="left_menu">
     <div id="left_menu_content">
      <a class="menu_main" href="?extsearch">
       Search
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php">
       Main page
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=203">
       On DEGOB
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2049">
       The Survivor Witnesses
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="?glossary">
       Glossary
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Encylopedia of Camps
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Supporters
      </a>
      <br/>
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="content_container">
     <div id="content">
      <div>
       <div style="float:left;display:inline">
        <h1 style="display:inline">
         Protocol Nr. 1608
        </h1>
       </div>
       <a href="?showjk_img=1608" style="text-decoration:none; color:#453c2d; ">
        <span style="vertical-align:middle; cursor:pointer; float:right; font-size:11px; width:126px; height:17px;  background-image:url('http://degob.hu/images/arrow_l.jpg'); background-repeat:no-repeat; color:#453c2d; font-weight:bold;">
         <span style="padding-left:30px;">
          scanned image
         </span>
        </span>
       </a>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both; margin-bottom:25px;">
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         S. Z.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         female
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Kralova u/Tiszo
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1927
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Kralova u/Tiszo
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         housewife
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Ghetto
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Nagysz?l?s
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Camps
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Auschwitz, Gunsfeld, Grossrosen, Mauthausen, Bergen - Belsen
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
      </div>
      <br/>
      <br/>
      The person in question has given us the following information:

My father had a shoemakers shop, and it was how he earned our 
daily bread. We were poor, and they did not really harass poor 
people. Richer Jews had to face much more harassment. Hungarian 
gendarmes entered flats and demanded money and valuables, and they 
beat those people half dead who would not tell them where they hid 
their valuables. Windows were broken and well-off Jews did not 
dare to go into the street because they were insulted without any 
reason.

The 12th of April, at dawn, gendarmes came and told us to get ready 
because they were going to take us to the ghetto of Nagyszőlős. 
They did not even give us time to pack a few stuff and some food, 
hence we could not compensate later for the meagre supplies of the 
soup kitchen. Men were taken away from the ghetto to work: they 
had to carry out the stolen belongings from Jewish flats.

At the end of May, they entrained us putting 80 people in each 
freight car. We had little water and got no food. We suffered a 
lot during this three-day-long journey. We were crammed in; the 
air was unbearable, while gendarmes did not even allow us to go to 
the window. If they noticed someone there they started shooting, 
and children got frightened and cried and we stayed close to each 
other. We were happy when we arrived in Kassa, because gendarmes 
handed us over to the Germans, and at least we got some water and 
fresh air.

We arrived in Auschwitz three days later. At the station the SS 
kept shouting while they selected us. They herded and chased 
people so that they formed lines, and we heard nothing else but 
"Los los". We were so scared that we did not have the courage to 
look around. We were just walking, and if someone stepped out of 
line, they would beat him. They took us to the baths, and I almost 
enjoyed the shower after staying in the stifling freight car for 
three days. We were deadly tired. They cut our hair off, gave us 
new clothes, and it was already at night when we got into the camp 
of gipsies. I hardly got some sleep when an hour later we were 
woken up. The sky was still full of stars, the air was cool and we 
were cold in the thin garments they gave us. Only a few of us 
managed to get underwear, and I did not have any. We stood in the 
open for three hours and roll call was repeated in the afternoon. 
Around noon there were always selections, and the people selected 
were moved into a separate block.

A month later, I was selected for a transport of labourers and 
they took us to Birkenau, Camp A, from where I went out to work in 
the Aussenkommando. We worked in rain and mud; we were hungry and 
were beaten continuously. A month later they put me in Camp B, but 
I kept working with the Aussenkommando. In this camp I starved 
even more. I was already barefoot because the bad shoes I had 
received soon broke into pieces during the work. When we went to 
work or came from work I saw transports arriving, and the sky was 
red above the crematorium. The people who got selected in the 
block would never return.

At the beginning of November, they took me to Gunsfeld with a 
transport of labourers. I was in the Neumann-Kommando cleaning 
Germans places. Treatment was good but food was scarce. Our camp 
was clean and tidy. 

In December, they led me from Gunsfeld to Gross Rosen. We walked 
for two days and nights. It was freezing cold, it was snowing and 
since we were lightly dressed we were cold. Whoever could not walk 
would get shot. When we arrived they seized whatever stuff we 
still had. It was very bad here. We did not go to work but were 
lined up for roll call twice a day for two hours each. Five of us 
divided a loaf of bread a day, and we got coffee in the morning 
and the evening, but we received no other warm food. We stayed 
there for a month.

Around the 20th of January, we left Gross Rosen for Mauthausen. 
There was a crematorium here. An SS-man did the selections; the 
sick were not treated but were carried away, as far as I know, 
into the crematorium, because we never saw them later. We spent a 
month here. We were terribly starving because we did not even get 
bread here, only soup at noon and coffee in the evening. When the 
English got closer to us they marched us from Mauthausen to 
Bergen-Belsen.

Our camp in Bergen-Belsen was in the middle of a large forest. 
There were at least 60,000 prisoners and deported people kept 
here. We used to go out to the forest to carry wood. SS-women 
escorted us with dogs, and beat up terribly and tore out the hair 
of the women who did not carry enough wood. We were starving 
terribly since we got no bread in the last days, only some soup at 
noon, and we were swarming with lice. There was no water and we 
could not wash. These SS women were crueller with us than the SS 
men.

The 15th of April 1945, the English liberated us. We complained to 
them about our leaders and the English replied that we were free 
to do whatever we wanted with the people who had been evil to us. 
So we taught them a lesson. We tugged hard the hair of the woman 
who had torn our hair, we cut the hair off the other one, we 
undressed the third one and made her walk around the camp three 
times and made her recite aloud: This was what I did to the 
deported, thats why I have to walk like this.

As soon as we were liberated the English disinfected us, and gave 
us clean, tidy clothes. As we were horribly hungry, and were dizzy 
from hunger they gave us ample food and took us to Bergen. The 
sick were transported to hospital, while the healthy were lodged 
in clean barracks. I started to feel again like a human person. It 
was good to be free, as I had thought that the misery I had to 
experience would never finish. 

After a few weeks stay in Bergen, we went to Gellen, from where 
the English transported us home through Bratislava.
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="right_menu">
     <div id="right_menu_content">
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main_hu" href="index.php?showarticle=2031">
        The Holocaust in Hungary
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_1')">
        Perpetrators
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_1">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2011">
          The Gendarmerie
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2012">
          The Police
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2013">
          The Public Administration
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_2')">
        The Gentile Population
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_2">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2014">
          Indifference, Antipathy, Antisemitism
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2015">
          Hungarian Rescuers
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_12')">
        Regions of Destruction
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_12">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2016">
          The Capital: Budapest
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2033">
          A City in the Countryside: Balassagyarmat
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2034">
          A Village: Rákosszentmihály
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_4')">
        Women
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_4">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2017">
          Hungarian Jewish Women in the Kanadakommando
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2018">
          SS Female Overseers in Auschwitz
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2019">
        The First Massacre
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2020">
        Antisemitism
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2021">
        The Jewish Council
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2022">
        Resistance, Zionists
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_9')">
        Death Factory - Auschwitz-Birkenau 1944
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_9">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2023">
          Prisoners' Fate in Auschwitz-Birkenau
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2024">
          SS physicians
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2025">
          What did the Victims know?
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_10')">
        Rescue
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_10">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2026">
          Decent Gendarmes
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2027">
          Policemen
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2028">
          Humane Officials
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2029">
          The Military
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2030">
        Looting
       </a>
      </div>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2032">
       Labour Service
      </a>
      <script>
       toc('menu_12');toc('menu_12');
				if (current!=null) toc(current);
      </script>
     </div>
    </div>
   </div>
   <div id="footer">
   </div>
   <a href="http://degob.hu/index.php" style="text-decoration:none;" title="magyar">
    <div id="switch_banner" title="switch to Hungarian">
     váltás magyarra
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="bphm_banner">
    <a href="http://bphm.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="bphm.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/BPHM_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#1d3c51;font-size:9px;">
      bphm.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <div id="holomo_banner">
    <a href="http://www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/holo_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#5b4b32;font-size:9px;">
      holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <a href="index.php">
    <div id="home">
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="scroller">
    <object align="middle" classid="clsid:d27cdb6e-ae6d-11cf-96b8-444553540000" codebase="http://fpdownload.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=8,0,0,0" height="18" id="scroller" width="927">
     <param name="allowScriptAccess" value="sameDomain"/>
     <param name="movie" value="scroller_en.swf"/>
     <param name="quality" value="high"/>
     <param name="wmode" value="transparent"/>
     <param name="bgcolor" value="#000000"/>
     <embed align="middle" allowscriptaccess="sameDomain" bgcolor="#000000" height="18" name="scroller" pluginspage="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" quality="high" src="scroller_en.swf" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="927" wmode="transparent"/>
    </object>
   </div>
  </div>
  <script src="http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js" type="text/javascript">
  </script>
  <script type="text/javascript">
   _uacct = "UA-316143-2";
urchinTracker();
  </script>
 </body>
</html>
