<html>
 <head>
  <title>
   degob.org
  </title>
  <link href="degob.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
  <script language="JavaScript">
   <!-- Hide the script from old browsers --

	var current;

	function toc(toc_id) {

		toc_element = document.getElementById(toc_id);

		if ((toc_element.style.display=='none')||(toc_element.style.display=='')) {
			toc_element.style.display='block';
		}
		else {
			toc_element.style.display='none';
		}
	}


    // --end hiding here -->
  </script>
 </head>
 <body>
  <div id="wrapper">
   <div id="header">
   </div>
   <div id="main_wrapper">
    <div id="left_menu">
     <div id="left_menu_content">
      <a class="menu_main" href="?extsearch">
       Search
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php">
       Main page
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=203">
       On DEGOB
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2049">
       The Survivor Witnesses
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="?glossary">
       Glossary
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Encylopedia of Camps
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Supporters
      </a>
      <br/>
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="content_container">
     <div id="content">
      <div>
       <div style="float:left;display:inline">
        <h1 style="display:inline">
         Protocol Nr. 3615
        </h1>
       </div>
       <a href="?showjk_img=3615" style="text-decoration:none; color:#453c2d; ">
        <span style="vertical-align:middle; cursor:pointer; float:right; font-size:11px; width:126px; height:17px;  background-image:url('http://degob.hu/images/arrow_l.jpg'); background-repeat:no-repeat; color:#453c2d; font-weight:bold;">
         <span style="padding-left:30px;">
          scanned image
         </span>
        </span>
       </a>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both; margin-bottom:25px;">
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         E. E.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         female
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Budapest
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1921
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Budapest
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         teacher
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
      </div>
      <br/>
      <br/>
      The person in question has given us the following information:

Around the middle of June, 1944, two Slovakian boys escaped from Auschwitz. In 
Budapest they submitted two protocols, one 24-page-long the other 16, which were 
the first authentic descriptions of the death camps of Auschwitz and Birkenau. 
Having transformed these minutes into a single document we translated it into 
English, German, French and Italian. The local heads of the Somér Hacajir sent 
them to the Pope, to the Swedish and English kings, to Roosevelt, and to Erec 
Jiszroel partly through Istanbul, partly through Switzerland. The Hungarian 
version of the protocol was copied and presented to the Regent, to the members 
of the government and to some prominent members of the Hungarian political life. 
Meanwhile, Rezső Kasztner started negotiations with the Germans. He offered to 
get foreign Jews pay either money or war material for each Jew who was not sent 
to death camps but were let leave for a neutral country through Germany. (This 
meant the preparation of the first so-called alia, which resulted in the 
privileged state of prisoners: 24,000 in Strasshof and 1,750 in Bergen-Belsen.)

Miklós Krausz, who was the secretary of the Palestine Office, and got asylum 
thanks to his contacts in the Department for Foreign Interests of the Swiss 
Embassy of Szabadság Square, started negotiations regarding the emigration with 
Consul Lutz, and using his political relations, also with head of police 
Batiszfalvy.

The 30th of June, 1944, the group of 1,750 people meant for Bergen-Belsen left. 
The following day, we started to register the next transports with the guide of 
Ottó Komoly and Rezső Kasztner in 12 Síp Street. These transports were ready by 
the 17th of July, but, to be more precise, we did not receive the permission of 
Eichmanns people. 17th of July, in the evening, Miklós Krausz invited us for a 
secret council. Others who participated were Ottó Komoly, Rafi, Pill, Albert 
Geier, Mihály Salamon, Dr. Fábián Herskovits and me. On this meeting Miklós 
Krausz presented the following:
The minutes we sent out at the end of June did reach their destination. As a 
result Roosevelt sent a memorial to the Hungarian government, demanding they 
made possible the emigration of those Jews who had a valid entry permit. This 
demand was answered by Prime Minister Sztójay, who agreed to set up an office 
coordinating the process of emigration as a part of the Swiss Embassy. On the 
top of that, at the end of June Miklós Krausz managed to make Ferenczy believe 
what was indeed happening in Auschwitz, and achieved that there would be a 
meeting organised between Ferenczy, his assistant Lullay, Batiszfalvy, Samu 
Stern, Károly Wilhelm and Ernő Pető in the flat of Samu Stern. At this meeting 
they agreed that in case the Regent (as the supreme commander) instructed the 
gendarmes of the countryside to come to Budapest, these would resist Germans 
even if they used force to deport the Jews on the 5th of July, which was the 
agreed date. That is what preceded the opening of the office in Vadász Street on 
the 24th of July. Consul Lutz requested that the office lay not far from the 
Swiss Embassy on Szabadság Square. We chose the office of the Weiss company in 
29 Vadász Street. We made an appeal for this place in agreement with Artur Weiss 
to the Housing Office of the government. Arthur Weiss asked us to set up the 
office as soon as possible since the building would have been soon demanded also 
by his business rivals, and to preserve his dignity towards these rivals he also 
wanted to obtain a chief position there. Miklós Krausz as the head of the office 
entrusted him to be the administrative head. The office opened the 24th of July. 
The first days Ferenczy and Batiszfalvy came to control whether the office 
functioned according to the intentions of the Hungarian government.

The job of this office was to register everyone who applied for a permission to 
emigrate to Palestine. Already in the first days, moreover, before the office 
was opened, we agreed in the emigration of several thousands of Jews scheduled 
for the first few weeks, who were to be transported in groups of 2,000 in 
personal vehicles, with collective passports through Romania. Ferency and Krausz 
singled out the Palatinus-houses in Pozsonyi Road designated as a gathering 
place for the transports, from where they could collectively depart. These were 
the seeds of what later became the protected houses.

The office in Vadász Street was clearly a Zionist institution or at least it 
started like that. We accepted the applications for passport mostly from 
Zionists. In the beginning of August, the fist collective passport was ready. It 
had two volumes. We immediately received the Hungarian exit permit and the 
Romanian transit permit. They did not want to give us the German exit permit 
though, because it was their goal to concentrate the rest of the Jews in the 
Western part of Hungary after the first transit left. Nevertheless, the Germans 
gave the permit in October, which was valid until the 1st of January, 1945.

This was what legally happened in Vadász Street, and it was already heavily 
criticised by the journals, for example by Déli Magyar Szó" (Southern 
Hungarian Word), where attention was directed to our activity twice in August. 
It was however the most important to find a neutral place for illegal activity 
where there was no chance to be caught. The Embassy was an excellent place for 
that, which had naturally extraterritorial rights. Evidently, we moved our 
illegal activity already in the first days to Vadász Street. In part, this was 
the place where we produced and distributed documents proving Christianity. More 
importantly, this was the place where we organised illegal emigrations (tijul) 
into Romania and Czechoslovakia. Our well organised smugglers helped the way of 
several thousands of people from Szabadság Square to Arad, basically from house 
to house. I have to note that neither Arthur Weisz nor Miklós Krausz assisted 
our illegal activities, what is more, it happened also that they banned Rafi, 
Mimis, Pill and Efra to enter the building of Vadász Street. (Of course, they 
ignored it.)

There was another important ongoing project in Vadász Street. There were several 
Zionist comrades kept in internment camps or jails not so much because they were 
Jews but because of forging documents still in those times when masses of people 
crossed the borders coming from Slovakia and other lands, and these people 
needed hiding places. These people were freed using original American letters of 
protection (which we stole, or rather I stole on Szabadság Square).

This is what preceded 15th October. That morning we listened to Hortys 
proclamation in Vadász Street. The day after we entered the building knowing we 
would not leave the place till the rule of the Arrow Cross lasted. The first day 
there were only 60 of us. The Swiss Embassy, which was the authority above us, 
declared that officers of the institute together with their families could stay 
in the building with respect to the urgency of the work to be done. Finally, by 
the day of the liberation the number of people living in the building raised to 
2,750.

Jewish houses came to be closed down and people were taken away. As a reaction 
young Zionists dressed in the uniform of the Arrow Cross started their mission 
from Vadász Street, and brought back bunches of Jews under the pretext that they 
were arrested. We were 500 already the third day.

Day by day it was more difficult to put up with the lessening space, the lack of 
food and to cope with the problems of sanitation. Luckily, International Red 
Cross was established in Mérleg Street in August, where the head was Ottó 
Komoly, the administrators were our Zionist comrades, like Efra, the head of 
finances, who helped us overcome problems of food supply till the time also the 
office in Vadász Street set up its own financial department and kitchen, and 
became self-sufficient.

The first attack from the part of the Arrow Cross occurred on the 17th of 
October. We managed to inform immediately Vice-Consul Steiner, who thwarted the 
action of the Arrow Cross bandits.

The 20th of October, men between the age of 14 to 60 were taken away, and women 
were ordered to be called up for the labour service by the 23rd. The indicated 
place was the sports grounds of the National Centre for High School Sports 
Clubs. We phrased the text of the Schutzpass that day, we dated them to the 23rd 
of October, copied them on 16 typewriters by day and night, and started to 
distribute them to anyone who belonged to the Jewish religion and made an appeal 
for them. Since there were no signatures on the Schutzpass, we right away forged 
them. Unfortunately, even among people who found asylum in Vadász Street there 
were some who sold these stolen Schutzpasses for money.

Since the permission to emigrate was given according to 7,800 certificates the 
government insisted that only 7,800 people could obtain Schutzpasses. This 
amount of people received their Schutzpasses basically already the first day, 
therefore our strategy was to declare that the 7,800 certificates regarded 7,800 
families, which comprised at least 60,000 people. When the sad march of 
deportees was set off on the highway to Vienna, we received neither cars nor 
officers from the Swiss Embassy to follow them and bring them back as the 
Swedish had done. We bought a car pooling together the money, put a plate 
indicating diplomatic affiliation on it and our Zionist comrades went to the 
brick factories and everywhere until the border, Hegyeshalom, from where we had 
to bring back the people using the documents we had produced. Men were made to 
march on foot close to Budapest, and we had success in several cases in bringing 
them back the same way.

The beginning of November they singled out the protected houses. At first, there 
were so few houses provided for the people protected by the Swiss that not even 
7,800 people had enough place. Later, we managed to get more houses for this 
purpose using Ferenczys influence. Altogether we put accommodated around 35-
40,000 people in the protected houses. Meanwhile the government kept asking for 
the list of the 7,800, and we were working on it.

Meanwhile the Housing Offices in 14 Szent István Park and 32 Pozsonyi Road were 
set up. The former was headed by professor Waldapfel, the latter by Márton 
Hirsch.

Still in the beginning of November, when circumstances in Vadász Street became 
almost unbearable, Dr. Rezső Mezei decided that the place was not secure enough 
for him and his family any longer, and wanted to open another subordinate 
office, and received the permission of the Embassy to do so. Mezei had been an 
officer of a bank and got into Vadász Street only as a friend of Arthur Weiss. 
His only merit was that his great loquacity saved the situation when men of the 
Arrow Cross attacked us the 17th of October. This is why the 15th of November the 
office in Wekerle Sándor Street opened, where the so-called elite, that is, 
the capitalists lived in apparent security.

It is part of Mezeis story that he managed to save around 500 people living 
there. Although the office in Wekerle Sándor Street had no extraterritorial 
status he succeeded by using money and his suspicious connections.

The 23rd of November, 5o clock in the morning, gendarmes woke us up in Vadász 
Street. Arthur Weiss, who went through obvious changes under the heavy 
responsibilities he had, reacted in the most spirited way. I witnessed when he 
told the head of the gendarmes, a lieutenant, the following: "Youd better clear 
the house of the gendarmes in three minutes, otherwise unforeseeable 
consequences would follow this atrocity, since gendarmes seriously offended the 
rights of extraterritoriality." As a result gendarmes indeed left the house 
without proceeding with their search for weapons.

After this event the 2,500-2,700 inhabitants of the house in Vadász Street 
enjoyed relative tranquillity if one disregards the identity checks done by 
detectives at the gate of the house for days on, or those masses that were 
arrested by the Arrow Cross, while waiting in front of the house to apply for a 
Schutzpass. Cellars, attics, and stores were all full of people. As a result 
sanitation got worse day after day, lice started to spread, therefore we needed 
to move a part of the people into the neighbouring headquarter of the Hungarian 
Football Association. We resolved this question by breaking through the wall 
between the two buildings, blocking the gate of the building of the Football 
Association opening to Vadász Street, hence, the two buildings looked as if they 
were one, and the Arrow Cross did never learn who stayed in the building of the 
Football Association.

Until the 31st of December  although it was not possible to perform work 
regularly any more  we provided the food supplies of the protected houses from 
Vadász Street. We set up a hospital in Tátra Street, and we provided it medicine 
and lint. We were waiting and waiting for the liberation. December the 31st, 
around 2:30 pm, we heard gunfire from the direction of the courtyard. First we 
thought this came from airplanes that had machineguns on board but we realise 
this was untrue when we heard swears against Jews and obscene words coming from 
the street. As it turned out, 9 young Arrow Cross men broke in through the gates 
leading to the courtyard. Led by brother Balog they first fired a serious of 
shots into the cellar which was used as an air-raid shelter, where there were 
around 1,000 of us in dark. They also threw a grenade into the same cellar, and 
another one into the courtyard where the latrines were, which were naturally 
always surrounded by a great number of people. They broke into the house and 
forced some 1,500 people to get out to the street. They did not find however 
either the correctly disguised entry of the so-called Somér cellar or the entry 
of the Mizrahi attic or the entry of the Football Association. During this time 
Arthur Weisz, having bronchitis lay in bed in the flat of his parents, where he 
was continuously on the phone, calling Szabadság Square, city military 
headquarters, the headquarters of the police, and the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs. We called the same organisations from the so-called council hall, where 
the Arrow Cross men entered only at the end. By this time, I already had a 
document certifying our extraterritorial rights signed by a German commanding 
general. In the garage of the Glass House there was a guard made up of officer 
candidates with high school degree who took part in the resistance movement 
because this was the place where the cars of the Romanian Department of the 
Swiss Embassy were parked. However, I have to say that neither this guard nor 
the police patrolling in front of the building hindered the break-in of the 
Arrow Cross to the slightest extent. We were staying there in the street and 
knew our way would lead directly into the Danube. Now, Arthur Weisz showed the 
most remarkable example of courageous behaviour. Although his wife, his son, and 
his two old parents were also in the street, he did not get frightened even for 
a second, and while he had a gun pushed against his chest he told them to calm 
down and forcefully that the building belonged to the Swiss Embassy, and these 
people were officers and their relatives protected by the Swiss state, and if 
they treated us like that Hungarian citizens would be treated the same way in 
Switzerland.

Here I have to stop for a minute to explain that regarding the protected houses 
we made contacts with two members of the Arrow Cross called Medgyesi and Bodor, 
furthermore with police chief Tarpataky, who made some concessions to the 
protected houses in return for bribery. Bodor was in particular benign with us. 
When he was informed about the atrocity of the Arrow Cross, he came to our place 
immediately and started walking up and down in front of our lines with an 
automatic machinegun, ensuring us that nothing bad would happen. In fact, 
backing arrived and we could return to the house.

The Arrow Cross shooting led to the death of four (Mrs Vilmos Scheiber, Jónás 
Fenákel, Ármin Schwartz) and seriously injured many.

The next after, around 1:30 pm the well known brother Balog appeared, who 
showed us at the gate an order, which obliged 29 Vadász Street to hand over food 
supply for 50 people for three days. Arthur Weisz called Miklós Krausz, who told 
him to give them the desired goods. We gave them 50 loaves, 35 cans, and 7 
bottles of wine. I was standing at the gate, Balog remained outside, and next to 
me there was Arthur Weisz. All of a sudden Lieutenant László Fábry turned up, 
who was the head of the so-called VÁP-team in charge of protecting Wekerle 
Sándor Street and Vadász Street and started to talk with Arthur Weisz. I do not 
know what it was about as I was engaged in counting the loaves and the cans. 
What attracted my attention was Fábry telling Arthur Weisz: "Take it easy and 
come with me Sir Weiss", to what I reacted in Hebrew telling Arthur Weisz not to 
go. He made a gesture in an offhand manner. Fábry then put Arthur Weiss in his 
car, while Balog left in the opposite direction. He came back in 10 minutes 
claiming that Arthur Weiss would be back by 5 pm giving his word of honour as an 
officer of the army. As we found out later, he gave Weiss to Balog who took him 
to 14 Városház Street and from there presumably into the Danube. When Fábry went 
to fetch him in Városház Street, as he claimed to have done, he was told that 
Arthur Weiss had been already let go.

This increased panic in Vadász Street day by day, which culminated after two 
days only to fade away completely when the new anxieties of the siege took its 
place. Further on, the Arrow Cross came to us maybe two other times to fetch 
food, but started shouting already at the gate that no Jews would be hurt, they 
only wanted to get food. Naturally, we showed no reluctance as we did not want 
to get hurt.

The 6th of January, in the afternoon, Jenő Fränkl sent a courier out for some 
reason, whose identity was checked by the detective of the Arrow Cross Pálóczy, 
once an actor, in front of the house. During the identity check the boy was 
shouting that he just came out of the building of Vadász Street, that he was a 
courier. In this minute the car of the Embassy stopped and officers Andor Gedeon 
and Tibor Szemere jumped out. Comrade Szimcha Hunwald, whose pseudonym as an 
officer of the Embassy was János Kühne stayed in the car. Gedeon entered the 
gate, the same second Szemere noticed that the courier was running towards the 
Embassy. There was a shot and the cry I am shot, and the boy fell in the arms 
of Szemere. The detective of the Arrow Cross was already at the car  the driver 
could just get out in time  and took Kühne and Szemere with himself to the 
police headquarters, and handed them over to the Germans, who put them into the 
cellar of the royal palace. Thanks to his language knowledge Tibor Szemere was 
occupied as a translator and got freed when the castle was liberated after 40 
days of jail, while Szimcha Hunwald was shot in the basement of the Ministry of 
Interior.

Naturally, this case generated panic again in Vadász Street, but there were no 
more Arrow Cross atrocities in the house or in the street in the last twelve 
days until the liberation. There was one exception when Iván Dénes courier was 
shot during the service he did for the protected houses.
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="right_menu">
     <div id="right_menu_content">
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main_hu" href="index.php?showarticle=2031">
        The Holocaust in Hungary
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_1')">
        Perpetrators
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_1">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2011">
          The Gendarmerie
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2012">
          The Police
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2013">
          The Public Administration
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_2')">
        The Gentile Population
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_2">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2014">
          Indifference, Antipathy, Antisemitism
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2015">
          Hungarian Rescuers
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_12')">
        Regions of Destruction
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_12">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2016">
          The Capital: Budapest
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2033">
          A City in the Countryside: Balassagyarmat
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2034">
          A Village: Rákosszentmihály
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_4')">
        Women
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_4">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2017">
          Hungarian Jewish Women in the Kanadakommando
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2018">
          SS Female Overseers in Auschwitz
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2019">
        The First Massacre
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2020">
        Antisemitism
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2021">
        The Jewish Council
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2022">
        Resistance, Zionists
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_9')">
        Death Factory - Auschwitz-Birkenau 1944
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_9">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2023">
          Prisoners' Fate in Auschwitz-Birkenau
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2024">
          SS physicians
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2025">
          What did the Victims know?
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_10')">
        Rescue
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_10">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2026">
          Decent Gendarmes
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2027">
          Policemen
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2028">
          Humane Officials
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2029">
          The Military
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2030">
        Looting
       </a>
      </div>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2032">
       Labour Service
      </a>
      <script>
       toc('menu_12');toc('menu_12');
				if (current!=null) toc(current);
      </script>
     </div>
    </div>
   </div>
   <div id="footer">
   </div>
   <a href="http://degob.hu/index.php" style="text-decoration:none;" title="magyar">
    <div id="switch_banner" title="switch to Hungarian">
     váltás magyarra
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="bphm_banner">
    <a href="http://bphm.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="bphm.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/BPHM_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#1d3c51;font-size:9px;">
      bphm.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <div id="holomo_banner">
    <a href="http://www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/holo_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#5b4b32;font-size:9px;">
      holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <a href="index.php">
    <div id="home">
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="scroller">
    <object align="middle" classid="clsid:d27cdb6e-ae6d-11cf-96b8-444553540000" codebase="http://fpdownload.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=8,0,0,0" height="18" id="scroller" width="927">
     <param name="allowScriptAccess" value="sameDomain"/>
     <param name="movie" value="scroller_en.swf"/>
     <param name="quality" value="high"/>
     <param name="wmode" value="transparent"/>
     <param name="bgcolor" value="#000000"/>
     <embed align="middle" allowscriptaccess="sameDomain" bgcolor="#000000" height="18" name="scroller" pluginspage="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" quality="high" src="scroller_en.swf" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="927" wmode="transparent"/>
    </object>
   </div>
  </div>
  <script src="http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js" type="text/javascript">
  </script>
  <script type="text/javascript">
   _uacct = "UA-316143-2";
urchinTracker();
  </script>
 </body>
</html>
