<html>
 <head>
  <title>
   degob.org
  </title>
  <link href="degob.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
  <script language="JavaScript">
   <!-- Hide the script from old browsers --

	var current;

	function toc(toc_id) {

		toc_element = document.getElementById(toc_id);

		if ((toc_element.style.display=='none')||(toc_element.style.display=='')) {
			toc_element.style.display='block';
		}
		else {
			toc_element.style.display='none';
		}
	}


    // --end hiding here -->
  </script>
 </head>
 <body>
  <div id="wrapper">
   <div id="header">
   </div>
   <div id="main_wrapper">
    <div id="left_menu">
     <div id="left_menu_content">
      <a class="menu_main" href="?extsearch">
       Search
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php">
       Main page
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=203">
       On DEGOB
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2049">
       The Survivor Witnesses
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="?glossary">
       Glossary
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Encylopedia of Camps
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Supporters
      </a>
      <br/>
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="content_container">
     <div id="content">
      <div>
       <div style="float:left;display:inline">
        <h1 style="display:inline">
         Protocol Nr. 3561
        </h1>
       </div>
       <a href="?showjk_img=3561" style="text-decoration:none; color:#453c2d; ">
        <span style="vertical-align:middle; cursor:pointer; float:right; font-size:11px; width:126px; height:17px;  background-image:url('http://degob.hu/images/arrow_l.jpg'); background-repeat:no-repeat; color:#453c2d; font-weight:bold;">
         <span style="padding-left:30px;">
          scanned image
         </span>
        </span>
       </a>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both; margin-bottom:25px;">
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         dr. L. R.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         male
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Pusztakvass#
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1896
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Székesfehérvár
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         physician
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Ghetto
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Székesfehérvár
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Camps
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Auschwitz, Neugamen, Brauschweig, Wattenstadt, Ravensbrück, Ludwigslust
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
      </div>
      <br/>
      <br/>
      The person in question has given us the following information:

On the 30th of May 1944, we moved into the designated houses and 
remained there till the 6th of June 1944. I used to go to the 
consulting room and went home only to sleep. They beat and 
tortured the Jews whom they suspected to have buried their 
valuables in order to learn where they hid them. They were 
particularly interested in jewellery. At 8 oclock in the morning 
I was the first who was taken to the gendarme headquarters but the 
gendarme staff sergeant called Jóna did not treat me brutally 
because he knew me since I was his doctor, but he sent me into the 
cellar ordering me to give medical treatment to people who were 
going to go to the cellar if they needed it. I was here till 7 pm. 
During this time several tortured women and men went to the cellar 
and received first aid from me. Especially, their arms and legs 
were beaten hard, so much that they were hardly recognisable. 
There was a doctor called Pál Merson who not only had his arms and 
legs beaten up  so badly that he needed to be carried down into 
the cellar  but also his head, his back, and chest was full of 
blue bruises caused by beating. At noon I was already very hungry 
because I did not have breakfast and I had some opportunity to 
send a message to my wife telling her where I was and asking her 
to get some food sent to me. My poor wife did bring me some food 
but a gendarme led her to the staff sergeant who held the 
interrogations, and he gave her blows with a rod on her hands and 
that was how he sent her to me into the cellar. In the evening at 
around 7 pm they let everybody leave the cellar. We lived in a 
starred house till the 6th of June. During this time I went to 
consult patients in the morning and in the afternoon. On the 4th of 
June a decree was published, which obliged labour servicemen to 
report and I was silly enough to send someone to find my son in 
Budapest and tell him to come to me. My son had his service 
adjourned and the decree made clear that even people who had 
adjournment needed to report. I did not want him to report in 
Budapest because I believed I was unable to help him if he went to 
report there. He did come, and appeared in front of authorities on 
the 5th of June, but could not return to Budapest anymore because 
gendarmes did not let anyone go into the street and took us to the 
brick factory in the evening. Until the 14th of June we remained in 
the brick factory. My son (who was also a doctor) and I worked in 
the part of the brick factory that was called a hospital. The 
place was overcrowded; we slept on the floor without straw 
mattresses and were badly supplied. Gendarmes searched us a few 
times and took away what they wanted to keep, like watches, rings 
and some valuable objects. They took us  as I have said  into 
the brick factory, and seized everything we had. We had to undress 
completely, and they searched men and women separately. We could 
only keep a little portion of food and 25 kilos of luggage. The 
Jewish Council was faulty inasmuch as they did not warn us that we 
were going to be concentrated into the brick factory, although 
they knew about it. I left all my furniture in my old flat, six 
rooms were furnished and everything disappeared. Several people 
died in the brick factory and some people even committed suicide.
On the 14th of June they entrained us. There were 65 of us in a 
freight car, women, men and children together. Everybody had 
luggage of around 25 kilos. Gendarmes, who would beat us on the 
way just like the SS, controlled the entrainment. We got bread for 
the journey and also water but there were also cases when we had 
no water. We arrived in Auschwitz after four days of travel. We 
were said to be heading towards Rahó to clear forests. When we 
started heading towards Kassa we already knew that we were going 
in Poland. On the Hungarian-Slovakian border gendarmes ordered us 
to hand over everything that was possible. For example we had a 
little crystal bowl. They broke the crystal part of it but kept 
its silver part. They declared that we were no longer Hungarian 
citizens and kept threatening us. We arrived in Auschwitz on the 
17th of June during the morning. The first thing we heard was that 
doctors should bring their bags and get off the train with their 
medical devices. I said goodbye to my family and left together 
with my son, who was a doctor, and people were already being lined 
up, women and men separately, and we had to start walking towards 
a so-called committee that was made up of SS soldiers headed by Dr 
Mengele, who then selected us and let me stay with my son. They 
took us into the baths where we had to undress completely. We 
could bring only our shoes, glasses and braces. We got into a 
hall, where they first cut our hair, shaved us, and then we 
entered the baths where we had a shower. In another room we 
received shirts, trousers, striped caps, and that was how we 
entered the yard, where they once again searched us to check 
whether we did not keep any kind of souvenir. They marched us into 
the so-cold Camp E, the Gipsy camp. We got into block no. 15, 
where they searched us again, and that was where we spent our time 
in idleness till the 2nd of September. We had to wake at 4 am, 
everybody had to wash, and then 30 people were selected every day 
to bring us breakfast, which was tea. Having drunk the tea we 
needed to turn out for roll call, for the so-called Appell, when 
they counted us. If it was heavily raining they counted us in the 
block, otherwise always in the open between the huts. Sometimes we 
had to stand there for 2-3 hours till they managed to determine 
the number of people in all the huts. At 11 am they newly selected 
30 people to carry the lunch. We had no cutlery. We were not 
allowed to keep either spoon or fork although my son prepared 
spoons of wood for me and also for himself, which we kept hidden 
in our shoes, and he also grinded a knife from half a horseshoe, 
but that was the entire cutlery we had. There were very few mess-
tins. We ate from a basin-like pot. 7 or 8 of us drank the soup of 
this basin. It was either turnip soup or a soup made of dried 
vegetables. At 4 pm another 30 people were selected to bring tea 
and at 6 pm there was a roll call that lasted again 3-4 hours, 
which was followed by the distribution of bread. Everybody got a 
slice of bread with a thin layer of margarine on it, or with a 
spoonful of jam, or a spoonful of sugar, or half of a thin Wurst, 
and then we had to quickly go to bed. Since the block was suitable 
to lodge only 1,000 people but there were often 1,500 of us we lay 
on the cement floor without covers like sardines.
The people who went to the kitchen for food were always beaten up. 
Although those who carried food could enjoy double portions it was 
very difficult to collect thirty people as everybody went in 
hiding or escaped in order not to go there because every time they 
had to experience harassment before they could return. Once, my 
son and me volunteered because we were already very hungry and 
wanted to eat more food. Since cauldrons were heavy four people 
carried one. They contained 100 litres of liquid and you needed to 
run with them. There were cauldrons that were particularly 
difficult to carry. When I went to carry food with my son we ended 
up carrying one like this, which was very difficult to hold. My 
son ran forward to avoid that I held the pot in the difficult 
place and for this reason he got such a blow on his left shoulder 
that his clavicle broke. He could take only three steps in the 
pain he had when another prisoner jumped in his place to help us. 
Naturally, we did not volunteer to do this work anymore.
The leaders of the block were gipsies. Capos and Blockältester 
were gipsies who treated us the most brutally, beating people and 
also distributing mortal blows a few times. Once, when we went to 
the toilet, because we needed to go in groups even to the toilet, 
and an acquaintance of mine wanted to go around a puddle and the 
Gipsy Blockältester gave him such a blow on the head with a thick 
rod that he dashed out his brain. He died on the spot and my son 
and me had to carry back the corpse to the block and lay it there 
naked  behind the hut  for days. The Gipsy Blockältester did not 
hurry to get him buried because the cadaver also counted as a 
number that could be taken into account when food was distributed 
and that portion went to him. When gipsies were burnt there 
remained a block of people who had some kind of college degree. 
This hut was then called the academics block. There were doctors, 
veterinarians, pharmacists, teachers, lawyers, engineers, and 
economists. Prisoners were selected from this block when people 
were needed for jobs that had been earlier done by gipsies: 
cleaning canals, disinfecting, washing, etc. This was how my son 
and me and another 28 doctors got the assignment to repair the 
toilet of the former camp of gipsy women. I stayed here with my 
son till the 2nd of September, when we got into the disinfection 
room, also called Sauna. This was the place where the clothes of 
the people burnt in the crematorium were disinfected, and also the 
clothes of the people who worked there, and where they bathed 
these people. My son and I worked in the part where the clothes 
carried to us were sorted out, hung on a little car and pushed 
into the disinfecting oven. One week we worked during the day from 
6 am till 6 pm, the other week from 6 pm till 6 am. After work our 
clothes were disinfected, we had to bathe and could go back to the 
block only afterwards. For this work we got double portions of 
food and bread.
My son got a disease of the mouth around the 20th of September. As 
there was no medicine it could not be cured. He could not chew and 
could consume only liquids. He became so thin that he was found 
unfit for work during the selections that happened on the 29th of 
September at 6 pm, and consequently he was taken away from me. I 
beseeched Mengele in vain not to take away my son, hugging and 
kissing his boots. They took him away and he was burnt already the 
same evening. I could only keep his cap as a memento. I could not 
even say goodbye to him.
I went on working in the Sauna till the 3rd of November, when the 
Sauna stopped functioning because they were ordered to dismantle 
and entrain the barracks. All prisoners were led to the barracks, 
one hundred of them to each, and the huts had to be dismantled, 
put on trucks, carried to the station and entrained. This was the 
most difficult job that went together also with harassment. People 
were already weak and the plank doors were heavy and we had to do 
everything in a hurry. This lasted until around the 16th of 
November, when they got the order to stop this work. We went to 
the station and were also entrained and carried away. 
The train arrived in Neuengamme, where they got the order to get 
all doctors off the train. All doctors got off the train; there 
were 36 of them. We stayed there while the train carried on, I do 
not know where. We went from the station to the camp where it 
turned out that they made a mistake because the order regarded 
only the 28 doctors of the hospital of Auschwitz, who came with 
the same train, so eight of us were surplus. They did not know 
what to do with us. We stayed here for two weeks, and under the 
circumstances we were relatively well supplied. We got soup for 
breakfast, double portions of soup for lunch, and double portions 
of bread and Zulag for dinner. We did not work at all but were not 
allowed to leave the block. 
Two weeks later, they got the order that the 8 surplus Hungarian 
doctors needed to be entrained. After four days of travel (when we 
got food only twice) we arrived in Braunschweig escorted by six SS 
soldiers. They led us into the concentration camp of the place. 
Two of us were assigned work in the hospital, while the other six 
of us had to clear debris. This was quite hard work. This was 
where I got the first blow to the head. It was so fierce that 
blood started pouring out. They did not let me wash the blood I 
had to go on working like that. When one of the doctors in the 
hospital fell sick I was picked to replace him, and afterwards I 
had quite a good life. It was impossible to cure the sick for 
there was neither available medicine nor bandages. Every day 
several people died partly from abuse, partly from hunger. There 
were selections all the time. People who would not recover from 
their sickness on their own were taken away to be burnt. Since the 
Americans were already close, I left this pace for Watterstadt, 
where I worked in the hospital, and shortly afterwards I went to 
Ravensbrück, but not as a doctor anymore but as a prisoner. We 
hardly got food here. It also happened that we had nothing to eat 
for two days. We got into Ludwigslust from here, again because of 
the American advance. We got here the first American charity 
packages, two of us shared one, which perked us up a little. I was 
already very weak here, my legs were swollen up to the knees, so 
when the Americans arrived on the 2nd of May I was taken into the 
American hospital where I recovered soon enough to get hold of a 
bike and although I was still weak, I started riding home. But I 
could not get further than the Elbe, where I was not allowed to 
proceed but was carried back to the hospital of Ludwigslust where 
I functioned as a doctor till the end of May. When the Russians 
replaced the Americans I went to a Belgian hospital near Hannover, 
where I stayed until the 20th of June. Here my daughter found me 
and took me to Kaunitz, where I worked as a camp doctor until the 
6th of November.
During my deportation I have experienced the following noteworthy 
events:
In Auschwitz I saw that the people who were selected as unfit for 
work were taken directly to the crematorium to be killed with gas. 
It was exactly on Rosh Hashanah that they selected children above 
the age of 16. Using a rope they signalled the height of 150 
centimetres and selected and gassed every child shorter than 150 
centimetres. A week later, on Yom Kippur they collected all 
prisoners they found in the block and took away even those who 
were assigned the job of carrying food. They killed them all with 
gas. I had to look into the mouth of the cadavers and had to pull 
out their silver or gold teeth. It was here that I got a second 
blow on the head because I did not check the mouth of a cadaver of 
a ca. 9-year-old child. Once, they brought a prisoner to me who 
had peritonitis caused by appendicitis. I was examining him when 
an SS soldier came to me and asked what problem the patient had. I 
said: peritonitis. As a reaction he gave him such a kick on the 
naked belly that he immediately passed away. 
The following case happened in Braunschweig: There were selections 
in the hospital and they collected prisoners who were incurable 
and were unfit for work at the huts. They put them on trucks with 
the objective to burn them. There was also a doctor from 
Székesfehérvár among the patients who said farewell to me and a 
rabbi, since there were several Jews among them, gave them a nice 
speech. We never stopped believing they were taken away in order 
to be burnt. When I left Braunschweig for Watterstadt I applied 
for service in the hospital. It happened around a month later than 
the aforementioned case. As I crossed the wards in the hospital 
several people said hello to me from different corners. I did not 
know how come they knew me, I did not recognise them. When I was 
crossing the surgical ward I heard someone call my name. I turned 
and saw the doctor from Székesfehérvár! Thus, they had been not 
taken away to be burnt but to be cured in this place. This poor 
doctor did indeed die later.
It was in Watterstadt that I saw German Catholic priests being 
tortured. They were forced to wear crowns made of barbed wire. If 
they wanted to punish these priests for something they hung them 
on crosses.
In Ravensbrück mortality was so extreme that everyday 200-300 
people died. Corpses were neither buried nor carried away but 
gathered in heaps so their smell could be felt from far away and 
flies were spreading. Next to the kitchen there was a rubbish 
heap. We had to carry it away and I was also ordered to take part 
in it. The Blockältester knew I was a doctor because he knew me 
and instructed me to make sure prisoners did not pick potato peels 
because they could fall sick from them. They had been already 
collecting potato peels from the rubbish, which they washed in the 
block, baked and ate. I seized the potato peels from the prisoners 
and in fact I consumed them myself. 
Still in Auschwitz hunger made us suffer so much that we ate 
clover leaves that grew by the canal. If we found potatoes we ate 
them raw with the greatest joy, just to eat something.
We had no contact with civilians; we were completely isolated from 
the world.
During the time I was in Watterstadt the station was attacked by 
aircraft (the concentration camp lay at the side of the railway), 
and one of the bombs fell onto block no. 17, where I was 
consulting patients. Around 500 people died and the blast shoved 
me to the floor too. During air raids I had to stay in the block.
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="right_menu">
     <div id="right_menu_content">
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main_hu" href="index.php?showarticle=2031">
        The Holocaust in Hungary
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_1')">
        Perpetrators
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_1">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2011">
          The Gendarmerie
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2012">
          The Police
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2013">
          The Public Administration
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_2')">
        The Gentile Population
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_2">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2014">
          Indifference, Antipathy, Antisemitism
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2015">
          Hungarian Rescuers
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_12')">
        Regions of Destruction
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_12">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2016">
          The Capital: Budapest
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2033">
          A City in the Countryside: Balassagyarmat
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2034">
          A Village: Rákosszentmihály
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_4')">
        Women
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_4">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2017">
          Hungarian Jewish Women in the Kanadakommando
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2018">
          SS Female Overseers in Auschwitz
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2019">
        The First Massacre
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2020">
        Antisemitism
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2021">
        The Jewish Council
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2022">
        Resistance, Zionists
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_9')">
        Death Factory - Auschwitz-Birkenau 1944
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_9">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2023">
          Prisoners' Fate in Auschwitz-Birkenau
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2024">
          SS physicians
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2025">
          What did the Victims know?
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_10')">
        Rescue
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_10">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2026">
          Decent Gendarmes
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2027">
          Policemen
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2028">
          Humane Officials
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2029">
          The Military
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2030">
        Looting
       </a>
      </div>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2032">
       Labour Service
      </a>
      <script>
       toc('menu_12');toc('menu_12');
				if (current!=null) toc(current);
      </script>
     </div>
    </div>
   </div>
   <div id="footer">
   </div>
   <a href="http://degob.hu/index.php" style="text-decoration:none;" title="magyar">
    <div id="switch_banner" title="switch to Hungarian">
     váltás magyarra
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="bphm_banner">
    <a href="http://bphm.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="bphm.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/BPHM_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#1d3c51;font-size:9px;">
      bphm.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <div id="holomo_banner">
    <a href="http://www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/holo_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#5b4b32;font-size:9px;">
      holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <a href="index.php">
    <div id="home">
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="scroller">
    <object align="middle" classid="clsid:d27cdb6e-ae6d-11cf-96b8-444553540000" codebase="http://fpdownload.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=8,0,0,0" height="18" id="scroller" width="927">
     <param name="allowScriptAccess" value="sameDomain"/>
     <param name="movie" value="scroller_en.swf"/>
     <param name="quality" value="high"/>
     <param name="wmode" value="transparent"/>
     <param name="bgcolor" value="#000000"/>
     <embed align="middle" allowscriptaccess="sameDomain" bgcolor="#000000" height="18" name="scroller" pluginspage="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" quality="high" src="scroller_en.swf" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="927" wmode="transparent"/>
    </object>
   </div>
  </div>
  <script src="http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js" type="text/javascript">
  </script>
  <script type="text/javascript">
   _uacct = "UA-316143-2";
urchinTracker();
  </script>
 </body>
</html>
