<html>
 <head>
  <title>
   degob.org
  </title>
  <link href="degob.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
  <script language="JavaScript">
   <!-- Hide the script from old browsers --

	var current;

	function toc(toc_id) {

		toc_element = document.getElementById(toc_id);

		if ((toc_element.style.display=='none')||(toc_element.style.display=='')) {
			toc_element.style.display='block';
		}
		else {
			toc_element.style.display='none';
		}
	}


    // --end hiding here -->
  </script>
 </head>
 <body>
  <div id="wrapper">
   <div id="header">
   </div>
   <div id="main_wrapper">
    <div id="left_menu">
     <div id="left_menu_content">
      <a class="menu_main" href="?extsearch">
       Search
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php">
       Main page
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=203">
       On DEGOB
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2049">
       The Survivor Witnesses
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="?glossary">
       Glossary
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Encylopedia of Camps
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Supporters
      </a>
      <br/>
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="content_container">
     <div id="content">
      <div>
       <div style="float:left;display:inline">
        <h1 style="display:inline">
         Protocol Nr. 3626
        </h1>
       </div>
       <a href="?showjk_img=3626" style="text-decoration:none; color:#453c2d; ">
        <span style="vertical-align:middle; cursor:pointer; float:right; font-size:11px; width:126px; height:17px;  background-image:url('http://degob.hu/images/arrow_l.jpg'); background-repeat:no-repeat; color:#453c2d; font-weight:bold;">
         <span style="padding-left:30px;">
          scanned image
         </span>
        </span>
       </a>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both; margin-bottom:25px;">
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         K. M.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         female
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Budapest
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Deputy Leader of the Welfare Department of the Swedish Red Cross
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
      </div>
      <br/>
      <br/>
      The person in question has given us the following information:

The first time labour servicemen and people who were to be deported received 
some support after German invasion was in April 1944, in the form of so-called 
Schutzpasses that they got from the Swedish Embassy. These Schutzpasses were 
given to people who had relatives in Sweden, and they were obliged to go and 
register at the KEOKH (National Central Authority for Controlling Foreigners) as 
temporary Swedish citizens. Nevertheless, these people were scared to register 
at KEOKH, if not for other reasons because they were worried to be considered 
spies, and it indeed happened more than once that the people who went to 
register were rounded up and taken away.

Swedish Red Cross started its protective activity only in June. Although these 
two rescue projects ran parallel to each other, they were independent. The 
difference was that the Embassy distributed the so-called Schutzpasses, while 
the Red Cross the so-called Schutzbriefs, letters of protection. Naturally, the 
Schutzpasses distributed by the Embassy had greater legal authority. Their 
owners were qualified as citizens with temporary Swedish passports and as such 
they were exempted from wearing yellow stars and could move into protected 
houses designated for this purpose by the Swedish Embassy. As I have said the 
criteria to obtain a Schutzpass was to have relatives living in Sweden, while in 
practice anyone could have a Schutzbrief, although there were some restrictions 
at the beginning.

It was thanks to the heroic dedication of Valdemar Langlet and his wife Nina 
Langlet that the activity of the Swedish Red Cross never came to a halt. 
Valdemar Langlet had a commission from the Swedish Red Cross, he came here with 
a special assignment he had received from the Swedish King, and as he was an 
enthusiastic friend of Hungarians and a great humanist (he was also the Swedish 
reader of the university) he dedicated all his time to this movement. The 
activity of the Red Cross was initiated in his two-rooms flat in Lónyay Street 
No. 3 with 4-6 enthusiastic members who worked day and night, amongst whom the 
Jews ignored the obligation to wear yellow stars.

As soon as the first Schutzbriefs were distributed the idea of establishing 
protected institutes for children was raised, especially because it became more 
and more difficult for families to get on. At the beginning no one could imagine 
to be separated of his or her children, however, as things got worse the number 
of applicants steadily grew. The issue of childrens institutes was put in the 
hands of Asta Nilsson, who arrived much later with a special assignment for the 
task given to him by Swedish Red Cross. We set up the first institute in the 
Sacre Coeur of Ajtósi Dürer Avenue at the end of August. First, the number of 
children was around 100, later, however, also grown-ups slid into the building, 
and the number of people grew to 150-200. First, our principle was to accept 
children between the age of 5 and 18, but later we accepted also babies. At the 
end there were so many applicants that we needed to establish new institutes. As 
far as I can remember these were in the

French Elementary School (5 H?gyes Endre St.),
Convent of Carmelite Nuns (Maglódi Road),
The first time labour servicemen and people who were to be deported received 
some support after German invasion was in April 1944, in the form of so-called 
Schutzpasses that they got from the Swedish Embassy. These Schutzpasses were 
given to people who had relatives in Sweden, and they were obliged to go and 
register at the KEOKH (National Central Authority for Controlling Foreigners) as 
temporary Swedish citizens. Nevertheless, these people were scared to register 
at KEOKH, if not for other reasons because they were worried to be considered 
spies, and it indeed happened more than once that the people who went to 
register were rounded up and taken away.

Swedish Red Cross started its protective activity only in June. Although these 
two rescue projects ran parallel to each other, they were independent. The 
difference was that the Embassy distributed the so-called Schutzpasses, while 
the Red Cross the so-called Schutzbriefs, letters of protection. Naturally, the 
Schutzpasses distributed by the Embassy had greater legal authority. Their 
owners were qualified as citizens with temporary Swedish passports and as such 
they were exempted from wearing yellow stars and could move into protected 
houses designated for this purpose by the Swedish Embassy. As I have said the 
criteria to obtain a Schutzpass was to have relatives living in Sweden, while in 
practice anyone could have a Schutzbrief, although there were some restrictions 
at the beginning.

It was thanks to the heroic dedication of Valdemar Langlet and his wife Nina 
Langlet that the activity of the Swedish Red Cross never came to a halt. 
Valdemar Langlet had a commission from the Swedish Red Cross, he came here with 
a special assignment he had received from the Swedish King, and as he was an 
enthusiastic friend of Hungarians and a great humanist (he was also the Swedish 
reader of the university) he dedicated all his time to this movement. The 
activity of the Red Cross was initiated in his two-rooms flat in Lónyay Street 
No. 3 with 4-6 enthusiastic members who worked day and night, amongst whom the 
Jews ignored the obligation to wear yellow stars.

As soon as the first Schutzbriefs were distributed the idea of establishing 
protected institutes for children was raised, especially because it became more 
and more difficult for families to get on. At the beginning no one could imagine 
to be separated of his or her children, however, as things got worse the number 
of applicants steadily grew. The issue of childrens institutes was put in the 
hands of Asta Nilsson, who arrived much later with a special assignment for the 
task given to him by Swedish Red Cross. We set up the first institute in the 
Sacre Coeur of Ajtósi Dürer Avenue at the end of August. First, the number of 
children was around 100, later, however, also grown-ups slid into the building, 
and the number of people grew to 150-200. First, our principle was to accept 
children between the age of 5 and 18, but later we accepted also babies. At the 
end there were so many applicants that we needed to establish new institutes. As 
far as I can remember these were in the

French Elementary School (5 H?gyes Endre St.),
Convent of Carmelite Nuns (Maglódi Road),
Hermina Convent (Hermina Road),
House of Social Sisters (Thököly Road)
Daughters of Godly Love (12-14 Farkasvölgyi Road),
Margit Institute (7 Knézits Street),
Home of Guardian Angel (16 Somlói Road),
Home of Grace (San Marco Street),
Seminary (Prohászka Ottokár Street),
Josephinum (Vörösmarty Street),
Good Shepard Home

and also in other places.

The Red Cross provided provisions to the institutes of protected children. 
Children had three meals a day. In these days also the Embassy gave food and 
established supportive places and hospitals, where the Embassy provided rations 
while the Red Cross safeguarded the institutes. I will come back to childrens 
institutes, I only want to point out first that not only Jews applied for 
protective letters. When Russians got closer also Aryan people, and even firms 
applied. A case in point is the Baross Association that offered its stores to 
Swedes only to be able to put on the signs and show that the Swedish Red Cross 
protected the buildings. Almost all clerks of the Ministry of Justice asked for 
protection from the Swedish Red Cross just like Jews.

I cannot avoid mentioning the merits of Dr. László Josefovits (Jékelyi), who was 
the secretary of the Swedish Red Cross, and who arranged through his personal 
relations that we received the first building that could stay under the 
protection of Swedish Red Cross. This was in 35 Légrády Károly Street. The 
Embassy had several houses but in this place only those people could stay who 
had Schutzpasses. Later, we managed to get hold of eight other buildings that 
were all placed under our protection. These were: 3 and 6 Návay Lajos Street, 8 
Tátra Street, Pannónia Street Nos. 19, 21, 25 and 30, and the building of the 
employees of the Swedish Red Cross in 6 Rudolf Square. Kálmán Kohányi actively 
contributed to obtaining these buildings. He was one those few Aryans who were 
not scared of being called friends of Jews. Several times he also helped save 
people locked in the brick factory or in Szent István Park. I had to administer 
these houses. I can say I had no easy job. It was very difficult to keep order, 
as people were so terribly undisciplined. Every day I had to restart stimulating 
and encouraging people to have the guts to keep to the rules in their own 
interests. It was the Arrow Cross that declared that they would tolerate these 
houses as far as they found them in order, but if they did not, they would drive 
all inhabitants of these buildings into the Danube.

Day and night the Langlets were on the move, and it became habitual that 
Langlet, despite his age of 70 years, would run to the protected house or 
institute that faced a sudden and unjust Arrow Cross raid. He would never fail 
to dedicate all his energies and he often risked even his life in order to 
resolve these situations.

The centre of Red Cross in 42 Esterházy Street also suffered several Arrow Cross 
raids. They robbed and set the office in fire and took away the labour 
servicemen who stayed there, etc. It was so unbearable that even the Langlets 
had to change flats from time to time to have greater security. There was anyway 
such traffic of people in the central office, and so many people looked there 
for a hiding place that the place became unsuitable for the task. The family of 
Baron György Karg came to our help and offered their house in 4 Sándor Street. 
We set up the department dealing with issues of protection here. This was a 
special department of Mrs Langlet, which dealt later with distributing flats. We 
realised here that unfortunately a great number of forged protective letters 
were in use. Unscrupulous hawkers sold these letters of protection for nice sums 
of money. You could see at first sight that the signatures were forged. Maximum 
number of letters of protection that the Swedish Embassy was permitted to 
distribute was determined at 4,500 while there was no such limit for the Red 
Cross.

I have to mention here two noteworthy meetings. One of them was in the building 
at 6 Rudolf Square, where Chief of Police Solymossy, who was entrusted by 
authorities to deal with the case of protected people, gathered everyone who had 
a commission. People from the Papal Legation, from the International Red Cross, 
from the Swedish and Spanish Embassies, etc. gathered here. We asked Solymossy 
how he could guarantee the protection of these houses. Solymossy said that 
everyone in these houses must have a letter of protection if we wanted that the 
houses were left in peace. He could not secure the future of that person who was 
illegally kept in hiding. The secretary of the Swedish Embassy, Wallenberg, 
asked of what sort of letters of protection he thought, and whether it was 
acceptable if they found in a Swedish protected house people protected by the 
Swiss Embassy and vice versa. Solymossy declared that authorities were not 
interested in these details: the point was that in protected houses only 
protected people could stay. When I returned from this meeting in the company of 
the Langlets into the childrens institute in Sacre Coeur (where there was 
already a secret office dealing with issues of protection) it became clear to 
me, because I knew Solymossys mentality, that his last declaration was 
suspicious, and it was the point where he was going to try to trap us. We 
produced letters of protections all the night, and the next morning at 10 am I 
went to the houses and gave a letter to everyone who still did not have one. My 
assumptions regarding Solymossy were right. An hour later, the Arrow Cross 
appeared to make order. What a surprise it was to find everything in order. 

Another meeting I wanted to mention was at the beginning of December. Its 
subject was the German request to make the international ghetto smaller since it 
occupied too much space; therefore we needed to liberate at least three streets. 
Solymossy asked how many people each institutes kept in their protection. I was 
astonished to hear that each delegate admitted a number around 4500, when I 
perfectly knew that they kept a lot more people in their protection, and I 
suspected that this would make troubles. When Solymossy asked the same question 
from me I responded that I did not know the exact number because we gave letters 
of protection also to Aryans, and among Jews only to those who asked for a flat. 
It saved the situation. I added that we had also childrens institutes in 
different places. Solymossy responded that childrens institutes were to be 
dissolved as in the future Jews could stay only in the ghetto. Two days later, 
we received a secret telephone call at 8 am. They warned us to empty all 
childrens institutes by 10 am because something was going to happen. In one and 
a half hours I took all children from Sacre Coeur into the protected house in 8 
Tátra Street. Approximately 15 minutes later the Arrow Cross arrived but did not 
find children in Sacre Coeur. It happened in the first days of December. 
Unfortunately, they could not manage to empty the institutes everywhere. The 
Arrow Cross took away the children from Margit Institute and from the building 
of the Daughters of Godly Love, and we have not heard about them since. They 
threatened the nuns of the Margit Institute with a bullet to their heads unless 
they handed the children over. Naturally, the nuns later bitterly reproached 
themselves claiming that they should have chosen death instead of letting the 
children be hurt in any form.

Nuns self-sacrifice and readiness to help merits a separate paragraph. Apart 
from the fact that it was their initiative to dedicate their institutes to the 
unfortunate chased children it was indeed touching to see the love and goodwill 
with which they treated these children, starting from babies to eighteen-year-
old adolescents. I cannot find the right grateful words if I think of it. They 
taught the children, took care of them, and gave them religious console 
according to their individual religious stance. It was an admirable, heroic 
work. As an example of their dedication I mention the Carmelite nuns who offered 
their own cells to children to give them everything they could. They did not 
care about themselves, only about protecting children.

The inhabitants of protected houses enjoyed protection till a week before 
liberation, when everyone had to move into the ghetto. The Arrow Cross ordered 
to empty a great number of houses, and their inhabitants had to march in the 
ghetto in closed lines. The objective was to make them appear to the bombers 
flying above the city as military troops and to get them bombed. Luckily, 
basically no one got hurt.
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="right_menu">
     <div id="right_menu_content">
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main_hu" href="index.php?showarticle=2031">
        The Holocaust in Hungary
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_1')">
        Perpetrators
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_1">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2011">
          The Gendarmerie
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2012">
          The Police
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2013">
          The Public Administration
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_2')">
        The Gentile Population
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_2">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2014">
          Indifference, Antipathy, Antisemitism
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2015">
          Hungarian Rescuers
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_12')">
        Regions of Destruction
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_12">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2016">
          The Capital: Budapest
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2033">
          A City in the Countryside: Balassagyarmat
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2034">
          A Village: Rákosszentmihály
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_4')">
        Women
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_4">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2017">
          Hungarian Jewish Women in the Kanadakommando
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2018">
          SS Female Overseers in Auschwitz
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2019">
        The First Massacre
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2020">
        Antisemitism
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2021">
        The Jewish Council
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2022">
        Resistance, Zionists
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_9')">
        Death Factory - Auschwitz-Birkenau 1944
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_9">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2023">
          Prisoners' Fate in Auschwitz-Birkenau
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2024">
          SS physicians
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2025">
          What did the Victims know?
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_10')">
        Rescue
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_10">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2026">
          Decent Gendarmes
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2027">
          Policemen
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2028">
          Humane Officials
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2029">
          The Military
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2030">
        Looting
       </a>
      </div>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2032">
       Labour Service
      </a>
      <script>
       toc('menu_12');toc('menu_12');
				if (current!=null) toc(current);
      </script>
     </div>
    </div>
   </div>
   <div id="footer">
   </div>
   <a href="http://degob.hu/index.php" style="text-decoration:none;" title="magyar">
    <div id="switch_banner" title="switch to Hungarian">
     váltás magyarra
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="bphm_banner">
    <a href="http://bphm.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="bphm.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/BPHM_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#1d3c51;font-size:9px;">
      bphm.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <div id="holomo_banner">
    <a href="http://www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/holo_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#5b4b32;font-size:9px;">
      holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <a href="index.php">
    <div id="home">
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="scroller">
    <object align="middle" classid="clsid:d27cdb6e-ae6d-11cf-96b8-444553540000" codebase="http://fpdownload.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=8,0,0,0" height="18" id="scroller" width="927">
     <param name="allowScriptAccess" value="sameDomain"/>
     <param name="movie" value="scroller_en.swf"/>
     <param name="quality" value="high"/>
     <param name="wmode" value="transparent"/>
     <param name="bgcolor" value="#000000"/>
     <embed align="middle" allowscriptaccess="sameDomain" bgcolor="#000000" height="18" name="scroller" pluginspage="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" quality="high" src="scroller_en.swf" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="927" wmode="transparent"/>
    </object>
   </div>
  </div>
  <script src="http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js" type="text/javascript">
  </script>
  <script type="text/javascript">
   _uacct = "UA-316143-2";
urchinTracker();
  </script>
 </body>
</html>
