<html>
 <head>
  <title>
   degob.org
  </title>
  <link href="degob.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
  <script language="JavaScript">
   <!-- Hide the script from old browsers --

	var current;

	function toc(toc_id) {

		toc_element = document.getElementById(toc_id);

		if ((toc_element.style.display=='none')||(toc_element.style.display=='')) {
			toc_element.style.display='block';
		}
		else {
			toc_element.style.display='none';
		}
	}


    // --end hiding here -->
  </script>
 </head>
 <body>
  <div id="wrapper">
   <div id="header">
   </div>
   <div id="main_wrapper">
    <div id="left_menu">
     <div id="left_menu_content">
      <a class="menu_main" href="?extsearch">
       Search
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php">
       Main page
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=203">
       On DEGOB
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2049">
       The Survivor Witnesses
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="?glossary">
       Glossary
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Encylopedia of Camps
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Supporters
      </a>
      <br/>
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="content_container">
     <div id="content">
      <div>
       <div style="float:left;display:inline">
        <h1 style="display:inline">
         Protocol Nr. 2466
        </h1>
       </div>
       <a href="?showjk_img=2466" style="text-decoration:none; color:#453c2d; ">
        <span style="vertical-align:middle; cursor:pointer; float:right; font-size:11px; width:126px; height:17px;  background-image:url('http://degob.hu/images/arrow_l.jpg'); background-repeat:no-repeat; color:#453c2d; font-weight:bold;">
         <span style="padding-left:30px;">
          scanned image
         </span>
        </span>
       </a>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both; margin-bottom:25px;">
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         W. J.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         male
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Budapest
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1910
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Budapest
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         tailor
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Concentration
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         labour service company no. 101/94
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Camps
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Engerau, Mauthausen, Günskirchen
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         A. S.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         male
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Beregszász
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1924
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Budapest
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         baker
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Concentration
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         labour service company no. 101/32
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Camps
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Engerau, Mauthausen, Günskirchen
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
      </div>
      <br/>
      <br/>
      The persons named above have given us the following information:

When Jewish laws were published my mother, who worked for the Centre for Milk 
Supply as a manager, was dismissed. My younger brother, who worked in the 
textile industry was also dismissed, hence I had to sustain the whole family 
myself. It was a real financial burden.

In 1940, I was drafted for labour service in Hárossziget where I suffered 
greatly. Sappers beat us all the time and used special measures against us. We 
could not be visited; we were completely isolated from the world including our 
relatives. The food was terrible. We lived in damp barracks, I had a continuous 
cold, my clothes were wet all the time because of rain, one could not dry them. 
The barrack was mouldy everywhere, full of holes, built of fungous beams. In 
such circumstances many passed away. We did various kinds of work here; we built 
embankments.

The next time I was summoned was on the 27th of July, 1942. I was drafted for 
labour company 101 3# in Gödöll?. We went to ## in Transylvania with this 
company, led by 2nd Lieutenant Gyula Horváth, who was a drunk bastard and 
treated us in the most severe manner all the way. We were beaten and rushed all 
the time. Everyday we had to march a long way, from early morning till late 


When Jewish laws were published my mother, who worked for the Centre for Milk 
Supply as a manager, was dismissed. My younger brother, who worked in the 
textile industry was also dismissed, hence I had to sustain the whole family 
myself. It was a real financial burden.

In 1940, I was drafted for labour service in Hárossziget where I suffered 
greatly. Sappers beat us all the time and used special measures against us. We 
could not be visited; we were completely isolated from the world including our 
relatives. The food was terrible. We lived in damp barracks, I had a continuous 
cold, my clothes were wet all the time because of rain, one could not dry them. 
The barrack was mouldy everywhere, full of holes, built of fungous beams. In 
such circumstances many passed away. We did various kinds of work here; we built 
embankments.

The next time I was summoned was on the 27th of July, 1942. I was drafted for 
labour company 101 3# in Gödöll?. We went to ## in Transylvania with this 
company, led by 2nd Lieutenant Gyula Horváth, who was a drunk bastard and 
treated us in the most severe manner all the way. We were beaten and rushed all 
the time. Everyday we had to march a long way, from early morning till late 
evening. When it seemed we could have a few hours of rest, he raised the alarm 
and ordered a roll call especially when he was drunk. In brief, he made sure we 
had not much of rest. He constantly incited the infantry against us. As a result 
they treated us the same way. From Transylvania we arrived to Sáp to work on 
railway constructions where we had to suffer the molestations of Warrant Officer 
Szigetfalvy. He made us crawl in mud and dirt so that we became shabby and 
dirty. He constantly  stole our pay.

For Christmas we came home. Afterwards, we had to join the company 101/33 in 
Mátyásföld. We worked here till August constructing the airfield. At the end of 
August the company was sent to Miskolc, again to work on airfield construction. 
The 5th of October, I was moved to Aszód to work as a tailor in a tailors 
company. The company was then sent to Pest, to the Freudiger plant that 
functioned as a military firm where we worked till the time of deportation. The 
leader of the work processes in the last company  unfortunately, I cannot 
remember his name  rushed and physically insulted us all the time. He also made 
exceptions to some people in return for money.

The 28th of November, having a strong military and Arrow Cross escort, we were 
entrained at Józsefváros railway station and departed for an unknown 
destination. We crossed the border at Hegyeshalom, where Germans took charge of 
us and transported us into Engerau.

1,900 of us arrived in Engerau. First, we dug trenches, later we cut down 
forests. Our flat was in a cold attic at the mercy of weather conditions. We had 
the usual watery carrot soup that left us hungry all the time. As our valuables 
had been seized, we could not alleviate our state. The Gestapo and the SS beat 
us all the time. They beat a lot of people to death or shot them. We had to 
suffer here the coldest months of the year without heating and lodging, and I am 
still surprised people survived these inhuman conditions. Wolves in the freezing 
cold had a better life than we did.

We set off for Mauthausen at the end of March. After 20 kilometres of marching, 
they shot a third of the population of the camp on the road towards Altenburg. 
There we embarked and started a voyage of 8 days. We received no food at all 
during these days, so we lived on the water of the Danube. A great number of 
people died of exhaustion, who were finally thrown into the Danube. People lay 
around in the bottom of the ship tortured by starvation.

In Mauthausen the weak were thrown into the Danube. If by chance they wanted to 
swim to the bank, they got shot and sank. We were led up to the camp where we 
stayed in tents or in the courtyard in mud, dirt and rain. Here we started a 
life which was about waiting for slow death. Food was so scarce that it would 
not have sufficed for anyone, especially not starving and tortured people. We 
got around 100 grams of bread and a few decilitres of carrot soup a day. The SS 
who guarded these ragged, feeble people treated them in the cruelest way. They 
beat and whipped us. Around 120-150 people died per day, mostly because of 
hunger.

Around the 20th of April, we had to leave for the camp of Gunskirchen, which lay 
around 60 kilometres away. Many were shot on the road; I would estimate their 
number at several hundreds. If someone went out of step to collect some grass, 
or cloverleaf, or a snail to ease his or her hunger, they were definitely shot.

We arrived in Gunskirchen after three days of walking. We were put up here in 
half-ready barracks where we were so cramped that we could not move, just sit 
all day long. If someone wanted to get out, he had to tread on hundreds of his 
comrades, often on dead bodies. Wherever you looked there were dead bodies, 
bodies shrivelled to the form of skeletons, and creatures who were skeletally 
slim. Only the movement of their eyes signalled that there was still a drop of 
life in them. These mentally and physically destroyed people could not say a 
word anymore  they were so weak. It was enough to push them a little to make 
them stay on the ground for ever.

We were starving, as our food was just a little bit of water with a few carrots 
in it and around 80-100 grams of mouldy bread.

We also suffered from diarrhoea and sanitation as there was only a single 
latrine for several thousands of people. He who could not wait for his turn in 
the queue was immediately shot by the SS.

I also have to mention how badly we were in need of water here. We got no water 
to drink or to wash with. Since we could not wash, hundreds of lice covered our 
weary bodies, which added to our suffering. Also typhus was spreading quickly. 
There was no medicine, no doctor, no hospital care against it, there was only 
miserable death. Once we reported a sick person to an SS leader but we saw that 
he only got a bullet in the head so we kept the rest secret.

Our wretched, miserable life had no prospects for any improvement; we had no 
hope for liberation. It was a real surprise when the Americans entered 
Gunskirchen and liberated us the 4th of May, 1945, and saved us from sure death. 
We lived well afterwards although still a lot of people died from different 
diseases.

These were our own experiences: 
??

??

??

??
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="right_menu">
     <div id="right_menu_content">
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main_hu" href="index.php?showarticle=2031">
        The Holocaust in Hungary
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_1')">
        Perpetrators
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_1">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2011">
          The Gendarmerie
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2012">
          The Police
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2013">
          The Public Administration
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_2')">
        The Gentile Population
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_2">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2014">
          Indifference, Antipathy, Antisemitism
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2015">
          Hungarian Rescuers
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_12')">
        Regions of Destruction
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_12">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2016">
          The Capital: Budapest
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2033">
          A City in the Countryside: Balassagyarmat
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2034">
          A Village: Rákosszentmihály
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_4')">
        Women
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_4">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2017">
          Hungarian Jewish Women in the Kanadakommando
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2018">
          SS Female Overseers in Auschwitz
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2019">
        The First Massacre
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2020">
        Antisemitism
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2021">
        The Jewish Council
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2022">
        Resistance, Zionists
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_9')">
        Death Factory - Auschwitz-Birkenau 1944
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_9">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2023">
          Prisoners' Fate in Auschwitz-Birkenau
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2024">
          SS physicians
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2025">
          What did the Victims know?
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_10')">
        Rescue
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_10">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2026">
          Decent Gendarmes
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2027">
          Policemen
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2028">
          Humane Officials
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2029">
          The Military
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2030">
        Looting
       </a>
      </div>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2032">
       Labour Service
      </a>
      <script>
       toc('menu_12');toc('menu_12');
				if (current!=null) toc(current);
      </script>
     </div>
    </div>
   </div>
   <div id="footer">
   </div>
   <a href="http://degob.hu/index.php" style="text-decoration:none;" title="magyar">
    <div id="switch_banner" title="switch to Hungarian">
     váltás magyarra
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="bphm_banner">
    <a href="http://bphm.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="bphm.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/BPHM_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#1d3c51;font-size:9px;">
      bphm.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <div id="holomo_banner">
    <a href="http://www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/holo_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#5b4b32;font-size:9px;">
      holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <a href="index.php">
    <div id="home">
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="scroller">
    <object align="middle" classid="clsid:d27cdb6e-ae6d-11cf-96b8-444553540000" codebase="http://fpdownload.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=8,0,0,0" height="18" id="scroller" width="927">
     <param name="allowScriptAccess" value="sameDomain"/>
     <param name="movie" value="scroller_en.swf"/>
     <param name="quality" value="high"/>
     <param name="wmode" value="transparent"/>
     <param name="bgcolor" value="#000000"/>
     <embed align="middle" allowscriptaccess="sameDomain" bgcolor="#000000" height="18" name="scroller" pluginspage="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" quality="high" src="scroller_en.swf" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="927" wmode="transparent"/>
    </object>
   </div>
  </div>
  <script src="http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js" type="text/javascript">
  </script>
  <script type="text/javascript">
   _uacct = "UA-316143-2";
urchinTracker();
  </script>
 </body>
</html>
