<html>
 <head>
  <title>
   degob.org
  </title>
  <link href="degob.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
  <script language="JavaScript">
   <!-- Hide the script from old browsers --

	var current;

	function toc(toc_id) {

		toc_element = document.getElementById(toc_id);

		if ((toc_element.style.display=='none')||(toc_element.style.display=='')) {
			toc_element.style.display='block';
		}
		else {
			toc_element.style.display='none';
		}
	}


    // --end hiding here -->
  </script>
 </head>
 <body>
  <div id="wrapper">
   <div id="header">
   </div>
   <div id="main_wrapper">
    <div id="left_menu">
     <div id="left_menu_content">
      <a class="menu_main" href="?extsearch">
       Search
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php">
       Main page
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=203">
       On DEGOB
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2049">
       The Survivor Witnesses
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="?glossary">
       Glossary
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Encylopedia of Camps
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Supporters
      </a>
      <br/>
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="content_container">
     <div id="content">
      <div>
       <div style="float:left;display:inline">
        <h1 style="display:inline">
         Protocol Nr. 583
        </h1>
       </div>
       <a href="?showjk_img=583" style="text-decoration:none; color:#453c2d; ">
        <span style="vertical-align:middle; cursor:pointer; float:right; font-size:11px; width:126px; height:17px;  background-image:url('http://degob.hu/images/arrow_l.jpg'); background-repeat:no-repeat; color:#453c2d; font-weight:bold;">
         <span style="padding-left:30px;">
          scanned image
         </span>
        </span>
       </a>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both; margin-bottom:25px;">
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         R. G.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         female
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Munkács
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1926
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Alsóverecke
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         housewife
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Ghetto
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Munkács
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Camps
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Auschwitz, Bergen - Belsen, Roshlitz, Grasslitz
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         K. H.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         female
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Alsóverecke
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1925
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Alsóverecke
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         housewife
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Ghetto
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Munkács
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Camps
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Auschwitz, Bergen - Belsen, Roshlitz, Grasslitz
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
      </div>
      <br/>
      <br/>
      The persons in question have given us the following information:

Before the German occupation, 108 Jewish families lived in Alsóverecke. These 
people were farmers and shop owners. Some were well-off amongst them. We had a 
flourishing bakery and we could afford to live carefree on its income.

Already a week after the German invasion, they took us into the ghetto of 
Munkács. Here, particularly Germans treated us cruelly. They would beat us. I 
also got 25 blows with a rubber truncheon.

At the beginning of May 1944, we were deported to Auschwitz. Already at 
entrainment, they separated us from our parents, who were later burnt. I know 
that they were burnt because I also saw later when the old and children of 
arriving transports were taken into gas chamber. We worked in the Kanadakommando 
in Brezinka. Our job was to sort out the luggage of deported people. We put the 
shirts, the dresses, toilet articles, etc. in separate groups. Once we opened a 
luggage and found a dead baby in it. It happened that we also found artificial 
legs or arms among the stuff of the people taken to the crematoria.
For me, the most horrible was the moment when I recognised the belongings of my 
seven-year-old little sister. Later, we were transferred to the Aussenkommado 
and we had to dismantle broken-down houses.

### we also worked.

In January 1945, we were moved to Bergen-Belsen in a transport of labourers. We 
did not work here. There was starvation and squalor. We slept on the floor. It 
was much worse than in Auschwitz. At the most, its advantage was that there was 
no crematorium here. It was in these times that the transport from Pest arrived. 
There were a lot of elderly who arrived with frozen feet. Every day, 20-25 
people died among them, and their corpses lay there like sardines thrown into a 
heap.

In the beginning of February, we went to Rochlitz with a transport. We worked 
for an ammunition plant. We got little to eat but it was good quality because it 
came from the kitchen of the plant.

Around the middle of March, they took us in Grasslitz, where they kept us locked 
in during the first three weeks. We were not allowed to talk; we had to sit in 
silence all day long. They did not give us anything to eat, while on the last 
week we worked. Work meant that we had to throw big stones to each other down 
from the top of a hill. We were not allowed to pass the stones, we could only 
throw them, so our hands were full of blood.

We left this place and marched for 14 days. In the evenings we got 3 pieces of 
potatoes each, and that was all for the 25-30 kilometres that we had to cover 
the day after. On the way we escaped from Germans and a Czech person in a little 
village next to Pilsen offered us a hiding place, and that was where we waited 
for the Americans.

I would very much like to go to Palestine.
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="right_menu">
     <div id="right_menu_content">
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main_hu" href="index.php?showarticle=2031">
        The Holocaust in Hungary
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_1')">
        Perpetrators
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_1">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2011">
          The Gendarmerie
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2012">
          The Police
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2013">
          The Public Administration
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_2')">
        The Gentile Population
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_2">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2014">
          Indifference, Antipathy, Antisemitism
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2015">
          Hungarian Rescuers
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_12')">
        Regions of Destruction
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_12">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2016">
          The Capital: Budapest
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2033">
          A City in the Countryside: Balassagyarmat
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2034">
          A Village: Rákosszentmihály
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_4')">
        Women
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_4">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2017">
          Hungarian Jewish Women in the Kanadakommando
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2018">
          SS Female Overseers in Auschwitz
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2019">
        The First Massacre
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2020">
        Antisemitism
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2021">
        The Jewish Council
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2022">
        Resistance, Zionists
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_9')">
        Death Factory - Auschwitz-Birkenau 1944
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_9">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2023">
          Prisoners' Fate in Auschwitz-Birkenau
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2024">
          SS physicians
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2025">
          What did the Victims know?
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_10')">
        Rescue
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_10">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2026">
          Decent Gendarmes
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2027">
          Policemen
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2028">
          Humane Officials
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2029">
          The Military
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2030">
        Looting
       </a>
      </div>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2032">
       Labour Service
      </a>
      <script>
       toc('menu_12');toc('menu_12');
				if (current!=null) toc(current);
      </script>
     </div>
    </div>
   </div>
   <div id="footer">
   </div>
   <a href="http://degob.hu/index.php" style="text-decoration:none;" title="magyar">
    <div id="switch_banner" title="switch to Hungarian">
     váltás magyarra
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="bphm_banner">
    <a href="http://bphm.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="bphm.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/BPHM_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#1d3c51;font-size:9px;">
      bphm.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <div id="holomo_banner">
    <a href="http://www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/holo_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#5b4b32;font-size:9px;">
      holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <a href="index.php">
    <div id="home">
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="scroller">
    <object align="middle" classid="clsid:d27cdb6e-ae6d-11cf-96b8-444553540000" codebase="http://fpdownload.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=8,0,0,0" height="18" id="scroller" width="927">
     <param name="allowScriptAccess" value="sameDomain"/>
     <param name="movie" value="scroller_en.swf"/>
     <param name="quality" value="high"/>
     <param name="wmode" value="transparent"/>
     <param name="bgcolor" value="#000000"/>
     <embed align="middle" allowscriptaccess="sameDomain" bgcolor="#000000" height="18" name="scroller" pluginspage="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" quality="high" src="scroller_en.swf" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="927" wmode="transparent"/>
    </object>
   </div>
  </div>
  <script src="http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js" type="text/javascript">
  </script>
  <script type="text/javascript">
   _uacct = "UA-316143-2";
urchinTracker();
  </script>
 </body>
</html>
