<html>
 <head>
  <title>
   degob.org
  </title>
  <link href="degob.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
  <script language="JavaScript">
   <!-- Hide the script from old browsers --

	var current;

	function toc(toc_id) {

		toc_element = document.getElementById(toc_id);

		if ((toc_element.style.display=='none')||(toc_element.style.display=='')) {
			toc_element.style.display='block';
		}
		else {
			toc_element.style.display='none';
		}
	}


    // --end hiding here -->
  </script>
 </head>
 <body>
  <div id="wrapper">
   <div id="header">
   </div>
   <div id="main_wrapper">
    <div id="left_menu">
     <div id="left_menu_content">
      <a class="menu_main" href="?extsearch">
       Search
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php">
       Main page
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=203">
       On DEGOB
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2049">
       The Survivor Witnesses
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="?glossary">
       Glossary
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Encylopedia of Camps
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Supporters
      </a>
      <br/>
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="content_container">
     <div id="content">
      <div>
       <div style="float:left;display:inline">
        <h1 style="display:inline">
         Protocol Nr. 2730
        </h1>
       </div>
       <a href="?showjk_img=2730" style="text-decoration:none; color:#453c2d; ">
        <span style="vertical-align:middle; cursor:pointer; float:right; font-size:11px; width:126px; height:17px;  background-image:url('http://degob.hu/images/arrow_l.jpg'); background-repeat:no-repeat; color:#453c2d; font-weight:bold;">
         <span style="padding-left:30px;">
          scanned image
         </span>
        </span>
       </a>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both; margin-bottom:25px;">
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         S. E.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         male
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Wien
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1925
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Budapest
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         upholsterer
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Camps
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Sachsenhausen, Henkel, Siemensstadt, Sachsenhausen
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
      </div>
      <br/>
      <br/>
      The person in question has given us the following information:

The 3rd of May, 1944, I was drafted for labour service in Jászberény. I was 
selected for a company that constructed railways. Following heavy bombings in 
Szolnok, we went to Szolnok and worked for a month restoring the railway 
station. None of the 95 tracks remained sound after these bombings. Our company 
belonged to the command of the corps of Szentendre, whose foremen guarded us. We 
worked with difficulties and had a bad life as the foremen beat us a lot.

The next stop was Újdombóvár, where we again restored previously bombed railway 
tracks. Here we had less to do, as the railway station was not so damaged.

We had to restore the shunting yard of Soroksár, too, where we suffered the 
brutality of the captain of the company.
We were transferred to Pestszentimre to construct a new rail. We had a bad life 
here. We had to build canals. 

In Szeged we restored the damages of the railway station caused by heavy 
bombings. It was quite tolerable here. We stayed for two months. We lived in 
freight cars because we were continuously on the move. When Russians approached 
Szeged and the river Tisza we had to leave for Baja on foot. We had not much to 
eat on the way. We tried to obtain some food in villages, and stole grape. It 
happened that we got pork, white bread and sour cream but only because peasants 
were scared of Jewish labour servicemen as Russians were already close.

The SS left Baja just before we got there. Locals told us that the SS killed 
many of the Jewish labour servicemen coming from Baja. We had luck as the last 
SS vehicle had left 15 minutes before we arrived.

Locals received us favourably: they gave us water and fruit and the kitchen of 
the company started to function at once.

In Baja we belonged to the headquarters of Southern Fortress Group. We worked 
here till Szálasi took power.

Russians were approaching us from the directions of Zombor and Szeged, and one 
evening they suddenly took us to the Danube to cross it by ferry. We walked till 
we arrived in Bátaszék, where there were Germans who started to kick us and to 
shouting at us. They treated labour servicemen cruelly; they did not let us 
drink water. 

They moved us to Mórágy, where we lived in the school of Volksbund, since ethnic 
Germans started to flee to Germany. Local ethnic Germans had disgraceful manners 
towards us. In Bátaszék people of the Volksbund made complaints against us to 
the gendarmes because we dared to ask for food. They accused us that we were 
robbing them. Our 2nd lieutenant defended us.

In Mórágy we received 25 Schutzpasses, which our relatives had procured for us. 
As a result, the cadet sergeant took us into Garrison Albrecht in Budapest. We 
stayed here for 2-3 days. The 1st of December, we were deported into 
Sachschenhausen from the railway station of Józsefváros. For a ten days long 
journey we received a loaf of bread each.

We did not work in Sachsenhausen. They seized our clothes and gave us light 
summer clothes with sandals with straps without stocking.

We were transferred into Henkel. We did not have to work either here. Germans 
said it was a place for quarantine but in fact it was a place for extermination. 
Many people died of great cold. Every morning we woke up to find several corpses 
around. Before we left this place we got wooden shoes and coats.

In Inag (next to Siemensstadt) I worked outside the camp. We had to load and 
unload wagons and build electric fences. A German forema) beat with the crop the 
person who stopped for a second. Treatment was awful, food was miserable. The 
soup was purely water.

In Siemensstadt I was selected for the L2 Kabelwerk. We worked in two shifts, in 
day and night shifts, swapping shifts every week. In the factory they treated us 
in a relatively humane way but we were terribly weak because we got basically no 
food.

The English heavily bombed the camp and hit the factory. Consequently, they 
dragged us into Sachsenhausen, where we stayed for a few days. The Czech 
Blockältester told us the secret that they were going to annihilate us. They 
wanted to gather us and take us away during one of the nights. This 
Blockältester put us - 10-12 Jews - into another block where there were Polish 
Aryans. We had a very bad life among them because they knew we were Jews.

On Russian pressure they took us into Schwein, where Americans liberated us.
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="right_menu">
     <div id="right_menu_content">
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main_hu" href="index.php?showarticle=2031">
        The Holocaust in Hungary
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_1')">
        Perpetrators
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_1">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2011">
          The Gendarmerie
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2012">
          The Police
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2013">
          The Public Administration
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_2')">
        The Gentile Population
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_2">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2014">
          Indifference, Antipathy, Antisemitism
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2015">
          Hungarian Rescuers
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_12')">
        Regions of Destruction
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_12">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2016">
          The Capital: Budapest
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2033">
          A City in the Countryside: Balassagyarmat
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2034">
          A Village: Rákosszentmihály
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_4')">
        Women
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_4">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2017">
          Hungarian Jewish Women in the Kanadakommando
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2018">
          SS Female Overseers in Auschwitz
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2019">
        The First Massacre
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2020">
        Antisemitism
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2021">
        The Jewish Council
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2022">
        Resistance, Zionists
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_9')">
        Death Factory - Auschwitz-Birkenau 1944
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_9">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2023">
          Prisoners' Fate in Auschwitz-Birkenau
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2024">
          SS physicians
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2025">
          What did the Victims know?
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_10')">
        Rescue
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_10">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2026">
          Decent Gendarmes
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2027">
          Policemen
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2028">
          Humane Officials
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2029">
          The Military
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2030">
        Looting
       </a>
      </div>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2032">
       Labour Service
      </a>
      <script>
       toc('menu_12');toc('menu_12');
				if (current!=null) toc(current);
      </script>
     </div>
    </div>
   </div>
   <div id="footer">
   </div>
   <a href="http://degob.hu/index.php" style="text-decoration:none;" title="magyar">
    <div id="switch_banner" title="switch to Hungarian">
     váltás magyarra
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="bphm_banner">
    <a href="http://bphm.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="bphm.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/BPHM_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#1d3c51;font-size:9px;">
      bphm.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <div id="holomo_banner">
    <a href="http://www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/holo_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#5b4b32;font-size:9px;">
      holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <a href="index.php">
    <div id="home">
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="scroller">
    <object align="middle" classid="clsid:d27cdb6e-ae6d-11cf-96b8-444553540000" codebase="http://fpdownload.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=8,0,0,0" height="18" id="scroller" width="927">
     <param name="allowScriptAccess" value="sameDomain"/>
     <param name="movie" value="scroller_en.swf"/>
     <param name="quality" value="high"/>
     <param name="wmode" value="transparent"/>
     <param name="bgcolor" value="#000000"/>
     <embed align="middle" allowscriptaccess="sameDomain" bgcolor="#000000" height="18" name="scroller" pluginspage="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" quality="high" src="scroller_en.swf" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="927" wmode="transparent"/>
    </object>
   </div>
  </div>
  <script src="http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js" type="text/javascript">
  </script>
  <script type="text/javascript">
   _uacct = "UA-316143-2";
urchinTracker();
  </script>
 </body>
</html>
