<html>
 <head>
  <title>
   degob.org
  </title>
  <link href="degob.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
  <script language="JavaScript">
   <!-- Hide the script from old browsers --

	var current;

	function toc(toc_id) {

		toc_element = document.getElementById(toc_id);

		if ((toc_element.style.display=='none')||(toc_element.style.display=='')) {
			toc_element.style.display='block';
		}
		else {
			toc_element.style.display='none';
		}
	}


    // --end hiding here -->
  </script>
 </head>
 <body>
  <div id="wrapper">
   <div id="header">
   </div>
   <div id="main_wrapper">
    <div id="left_menu">
     <div id="left_menu_content">
      <a class="menu_main" href="?extsearch">
       Search
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php">
       Main page
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=203">
       On DEGOB
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2049">
       The Survivor Witnesses
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="?glossary">
       Glossary
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Encylopedia of Camps
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Supporters
      </a>
      <br/>
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="content_container">
     <div id="content">
      <div>
       <div style="float:left;display:inline">
        <h1 style="display:inline">
         Protocol Nr. 2600
        </h1>
       </div>
       <a href="?showjk_img=2600" style="text-decoration:none; color:#453c2d; ">
        <span style="vertical-align:middle; cursor:pointer; float:right; font-size:11px; width:126px; height:17px;  background-image:url('http://degob.hu/images/arrow_l.jpg'); background-repeat:no-repeat; color:#453c2d; font-weight:bold;">
         <span style="padding-left:30px;">
          scanned image
         </span>
        </span>
       </a>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both; margin-bottom:25px;">
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         M. L.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         male
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Barcs
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1904
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Budapest
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         clerk
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Camps
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Türkheim, Kaufering, Türkheim, Dachau, Allach
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
      </div>
      <br/>
      <br/>
      The person in question has given us the following information:

As a clerk of a war plant I did not have to join labour service. However, the 
7th of July, 1944, Arrow Cross men came into the office and took me away from 
behind my desk. I wore a normal dress and light shoes. I was taken to Csepel, to 
the Weiss Manfréd factory. The 27th of July, there were serious bombings and 
Jews were not allowed to go down into the bunker. 28 labour servicemen died. 
Labourers felt more sympathy towards us; thanks to them, I managed to get 
letters and packs from home. When on the 15th of October the Arrow Cross took 
over the factory this practice came to an end. One morning the company had to 
leave, and we started walking on the highway towards Vienna. The trip lasted 
nine days. We got warm food only once. Most of the time, we slept in the open. 
We had to march at a rushed pace, 35-40 kilometres a day. The worst thing was 
that they forced us to sing what made us even more tired. They tried to make us 
believe that we would remain in the country. We arrived in Mosonmagyaróvár, 
where they said that we would now cross the border, however, we would stay close 
to it. This again was said only to keep us back from escaping, nevertheless, 
there were people who escaped. We received our wage only before they handed us 
over, because they thought this could be another motive to stop those who were 
prepared to escape. At Hegyeshalom great masses of Gestapo and SS people were 
waiting for us. They took us into Zürrendorf, where we were entrained. We 
travelled for two days and got warm food, bread and cheese once. Naturally, the 
doors were locked, and windows could not be opened. We had an SS escort. They 
threatened to shoot those who may try to escape.

Türkheim was a brand new camp, and our transport was the first to arrive. There 
were around 1200 of us, only Hungarian Jewish labour servicemen. The first 
evening we slept in an underground bunker on the floor without straw. The day 
after we got straw and later they prepared wooden bunks. Bunkers were dark, 
dirty and cold. The day after there was a roll call and they put together 
Kommandos of labourers. I was appointed as a Lagerpolizei but I lost this 
position the following day because I was not spirited enough in beating my 
comrades. I worked for various Kommandos of labourers. We constructed buildings, 
did the work of plumbers, work on the fields, etc. If one regards the quantity 
of work rations were impossibly little: 3 decilitres of coffee in the morning 
with a small slice of bread, an empty soup at noon, sometimes with 3-4 for 
pieces of potatoes. We were starving a lot. Taking all risks we stole potatoes 
from the pit, because we were starving terribly. It happened that Sundays locals 
dropped some food for us. If the Capo caught someone taking the pack he would 
shoot him. There was an infirmary, but always full, one could not get in. Many 
people died of exhaustion, in the so-called "Lagerscheisserei."

A doctor arrived and ordered to send 200-250 people to Kaufering. (Some 
transport had already left for Augsburg and other places.) Without examining us 
he selected us and SS-men escorted us into Kaufering. We worked for the infamous 
Moll-factory, 4 kilometres away from the camp. We had to do this distance every 
day running, escorted by the SS, who beat us with the butt. Working time was 14 
hours a day so we had only three hours for rest at the most. We did the heaviest 
work: we had to work with cement. We had to carry cement sacks of minimum 50 
kilos each to the mixer making 50 stairs upwards. While you were carrying the 
sack they would kick you, beat you, and curse you. There was not a break for a 
second. The cement ate the skin of my hands and shoulders; I got wounds. On the 
way back from work we had to carry coal so that the camp could be heated. Some 
people collapsed on the road, we had to carry them, too. Every day we got home 
deadly tired. On the third week I went to see the doctor and told him that I was 
unable to carry on. Having long pleaded, he gave me two days off in the 
convalescent block, which I managed to prolong for ten days. In the meantime, I 
lived in terror of death as they declared that the people who did not work were 
going to be put into Camp 4, and this was known to be equal to death. We could 
not find out what they did to people there, but no one returned. Ten days later, 
the camp of Türkheim asked back the people who had come from there, consequently 
I returned to Türkheim as a bag of bones. 

In Türkheim I went on staying in the infirmary, although they warned me that I 
may incur troubles like that. Therefore I started to work sick, laying ducts in 
the ground. We dug ditches, lay ducts and covered them with soil. They treated 
us horribly also here. The Lagerältester beat people till blood flew. For this 
goal he used a wire sewed in leather. Later, women arrived from Pest, then from 
Burgau: around 1200 Jewish women of Polish and other origins. Womens camp was 
separated from ours by barbed wire fence. Although it was prohibited to talk 
with them we managed to have contact. Women had somewhat better conditions here. 
They were not forced to work so hard and were not beaten so cruelly. Fewer women 
died than men.

When bombings started we had to set off in the direction of Dachau. We walked 
for three days although we were all completely enfeebled and depressed. We got 
food only once. We were terribly starving; we dug out raw potatoes or carrots 
from dung. We ate snails, grass, and nettle - anything we found. Many fell. 
These people were put on cars and taken into Camp 4. To encourage us they told 
us that we were going to be received by the Red Cross, which had already taken 
charge of 30,000 people and would take charge of us, too. We only needed to rush 
to get there as soon as possible.

In Dachau they put us into a huge, filthy, and lousy stone building. We lay on 
the floor on straw full of lice, and were waiting for death or for liberation. 
We heard about Himmlers order to exterminate all Jewish prisoners. Since Dachau 
proved to be small they moved us into Allach, which was 7 kilometres further 
away. There was great squalor also there. I fell in complete apathy and was not 
frightened not even when we found ourselves in the middle of heavy bombings the 
same night. I was just lying, I could not move when Americans arrived.
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="right_menu">
     <div id="right_menu_content">
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main_hu" href="index.php?showarticle=2031">
        The Holocaust in Hungary
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_1')">
        Perpetrators
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_1">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2011">
          The Gendarmerie
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2012">
          The Police
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2013">
          The Public Administration
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_2')">
        The Gentile Population
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_2">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2014">
          Indifference, Antipathy, Antisemitism
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2015">
          Hungarian Rescuers
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_12')">
        Regions of Destruction
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_12">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2016">
          The Capital: Budapest
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2033">
          A City in the Countryside: Balassagyarmat
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2034">
          A Village: Rákosszentmihály
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_4')">
        Women
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_4">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2017">
          Hungarian Jewish Women in the Kanadakommando
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2018">
          SS Female Overseers in Auschwitz
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2019">
        The First Massacre
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2020">
        Antisemitism
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2021">
        The Jewish Council
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2022">
        Resistance, Zionists
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_9')">
        Death Factory - Auschwitz-Birkenau 1944
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_9">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2023">
          Prisoners' Fate in Auschwitz-Birkenau
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2024">
          SS physicians
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2025">
          What did the Victims know?
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_10')">
        Rescue
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_10">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2026">
          Decent Gendarmes
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2027">
          Policemen
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2028">
          Humane Officials
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2029">
          The Military
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2030">
        Looting
       </a>
      </div>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2032">
       Labour Service
      </a>
      <script>
       toc('menu_12');toc('menu_12');
				if (current!=null) toc(current);
      </script>
     </div>
    </div>
   </div>
   <div id="footer">
   </div>
   <a href="http://degob.hu/index.php" style="text-decoration:none;" title="magyar">
    <div id="switch_banner" title="switch to Hungarian">
     váltás magyarra
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="bphm_banner">
    <a href="http://bphm.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="bphm.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/BPHM_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#1d3c51;font-size:9px;">
      bphm.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <div id="holomo_banner">
    <a href="http://www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/holo_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#5b4b32;font-size:9px;">
      holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <a href="index.php">
    <div id="home">
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="scroller">
    <object align="middle" classid="clsid:d27cdb6e-ae6d-11cf-96b8-444553540000" codebase="http://fpdownload.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=8,0,0,0" height="18" id="scroller" width="927">
     <param name="allowScriptAccess" value="sameDomain"/>
     <param name="movie" value="scroller_en.swf"/>
     <param name="quality" value="high"/>
     <param name="wmode" value="transparent"/>
     <param name="bgcolor" value="#000000"/>
     <embed align="middle" allowscriptaccess="sameDomain" bgcolor="#000000" height="18" name="scroller" pluginspage="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" quality="high" src="scroller_en.swf" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="927" wmode="transparent"/>
    </object>
   </div>
  </div>
  <script src="http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js" type="text/javascript">
  </script>
  <script type="text/javascript">
   _uacct = "UA-316143-2";
urchinTracker();
  </script>
 </body>
</html>
