<html>
 <head>
  <title>
   degob.org
  </title>
  <link href="degob.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
  <script language="JavaScript">
   <!-- Hide the script from old browsers --

	var current;

	function toc(toc_id) {

		toc_element = document.getElementById(toc_id);

		if ((toc_element.style.display=='none')||(toc_element.style.display=='')) {
			toc_element.style.display='block';
		}
		else {
			toc_element.style.display='none';
		}
	}


    // --end hiding here -->
  </script>
 </head>
 <body>
  <div id="wrapper">
   <div id="header">
   </div>
   <div id="main_wrapper">
    <div id="left_menu">
     <div id="left_menu_content">
      <a class="menu_main" href="?extsearch">
       Search
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php">
       Main page
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=203">
       On DEGOB
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2049">
       The Survivor Witnesses
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="?glossary">
       Glossary
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Encylopedia of Camps
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Supporters
      </a>
      <br/>
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="content_container">
     <div id="content">
      <div>
       <div style="float:left;display:inline">
        <h1 style="display:inline">
         Protocol Nr. 3620
        </h1>
       </div>
       <a href="?showjk_img=3620" style="text-decoration:none; color:#453c2d; ">
        <span style="vertical-align:middle; cursor:pointer; float:right; font-size:11px; width:126px; height:17px;  background-image:url('http://degob.hu/images/arrow_l.jpg'); background-repeat:no-repeat; color:#453c2d; font-weight:bold;">
         <span style="padding-left:30px;">
          scanned image
         </span>
        </span>
       </a>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both; margin-bottom:25px;">
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         F. T.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         male
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Püspökladány
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1925
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Budapest
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         medical student
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Camps
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Rökk Szilárd utca 26. internálótábor
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
      </div>
      <br/>
      <br/>
      The person in question has given us the following information:

In the afternoon of the 19th of March, 1944, German SS soldiers occupied the 
rabbi seminary in Rökk Szilárd Street No. 26. They made the students of the 
neighbouring boarding school bring out the benches from the seminary and 
replaced them with beds. Few days later, they brought in the prime figures of 
Jewish economic life; a part of them had been already in police custody. The 
head of the police was assistant draftsman Dr Pál Ubrizsy, the heads of guards 
were non-commissioned officers Kiss and Tóth.

It happened in the first days of April that we learnt about the news (while we 
stayed in the air raid shelter because of an alarm) that Antal Budai Goldberger 
had been in his plant and declared that he would soon return and take charge of 
the factory. At midnight, the commander of the SS called the chief policeman in 
the shelter and told him that he had to keep the people who were in custody in 
the shelter until further notice and they should not get any food. The day 
after, a civilian delegate of the SS called Takács, who was an alleged 
university student in Pozsony, appeared, and got the people  with no respect to 
their age  taken out in the courtyard and made them jump over logs and do 
gymnastics for a long time. He brutally beat up a 21-year-old boy and even broke 
his glasses because he sensed the boy watched him with a cheeky face.

It is part of the story of gymnastics that also SS men were present headed by 
2nd Lieutenant Wisliceny. When Lajos Láng, a member of the House of Lords  also 
kept in custody  could not jump over the log Takács shot several times around 
his feet, which caused a heart attack to Láng, and he had to be delivered to 
hospital.

The 8th of April, they informed the people in custody that they were going to 
carry them away, hence, they wanted them to hand over their valuables and money, 
since they could not bring it anyway. Early morning of the following day, the 
9th of April, non-commissioned officer Kiss and his people led them to Keleti 
railway station, from where they travelled to the internment camp of Kistarcsa.

The 15th of April, out of the foreigners who had registered at the National 
Central Authority for Controlling Foreigners 500 were brought in the seminary in 
Rökk Szilárd Street, and only those were let free who could prove their 
Christian origins.

I was on service as a member of the medical staff in the consulting room. At the 
beginning, also non-commissioned officer Kiss came to control medical visits, 
and he prohibited us from ordering or bringing in medicine even in severe cases. 
Most of the interned stayed here without personal belongings, 50-60 of them 
crammed into a little classroom, where there were not even 20 sleeping places. A 
few days later, they put in detention also Dr Endre Kelemen (although he had 
long been a Lutheran), who had good political rapports, among others he knew 
also Kállay, and now he managed to achieve that medical equipment  in a minimal 
quantity  could be obtained. 

A few days later, they started to do selections and took the men fit for work, 
especially the young, to Tsuk Yard in Csepel and to Mauthner Yard. They also 
took Dr István Hahn and us to Tsuk Yard, where they indicated the place for a 
kitchen and a consulting room. Ubrizsy, who usually appeared with a whip, gave a 
long talk to the people who were present. He said they had not been taken here 
to go home but to go to meet their maker, or to be deported. They crammed more 
than 200 hundred people into a room that was not even ready yet. First, they 
searched them and seized everything but the most elementary stuff. Three 
policemen guarded them in Tsuk Yard, who abused the defenceless state of women 
and violated them. As far as we knew situation was even worse in this respect in 
Mauthner Yard. Once, a policeman on guard pulled off the blanket from Éva Ádám, 
who was a neurotic patient and wanted to violate her. I informed Dr Tibor 
Neumann about it. He was responsible for the spiritual welfare of the interned. 
I heard from Évá Ádám that during a night policemen took away 5 women who never 
returned later.

Soon, they selected people also in Tsuk Yard and transported strong men fit for 
work to Horthy-liget, where they were lodged in a building that had been once 
used as a stall. They were the most severely guarded and controlled.

In the meantime, they established an internment camp in Páva Street, where they 
gathered the sick and the young, and where conditions were more supportable.

At the same time the journalists who reported for the call of placards or were 
individually arrested were gathered in Rökk Szilárd Street and distributed 
between Tsuk Yard and Horthy-liget.

Meanwhile, yellow stars had to be worn. This offered an easy way to arrest 
people arbitrarily.

One Saturday morning, I heard when Ubrizsy instructed the three detectives who 
belonged to his authority that he needed 60 Jews for Monday morning. Detectives 
told him that it was impossible to capture so many Jews by Monday morning since 
Jews were extremely cautious, did not go out, and if they did they did not cover 
the yellow star as they were scared to be arrested. Ubrizsy instructed them to 
stand at the first corner and capture the first 60 people who came by because he 
was directly responsible to László Endre, and needed to account for all the 
actions to him, and he repeated several times that he would go and see László 
Endre to make a report. The three detectives collected the 60 people. A telling 
example of the way they arrested people was when a Sunday morning in front of 
the café "MIENK" (Ours) one of them put a hand on the shoulder of man from 
behind, who wore the star openly, and told him that he was arrested because he 
covered the yellow star.

One day, a Polish woman escaped from Tsuk-yard. As a result, they imposed the 
most severe sanctions on the camp. Policemen assaulted women and children 
considering their most trivial moves as serious crimes. For a few days they gave 
them no provisions at all, and they could not go to the air raid shelter during 
an alarm. Later, in general, Jews could not enter the air raid shelter because 
they said there were too many of them and anyway the English and Russians would 
not bomb Jews.

I left the camp the 30th of May, 1944, and was drafted for labour service.
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="right_menu">
     <div id="right_menu_content">
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main_hu" href="index.php?showarticle=2031">
        The Holocaust in Hungary
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_1')">
        Perpetrators
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_1">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2011">
          The Gendarmerie
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2012">
          The Police
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2013">
          The Public Administration
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_2')">
        The Gentile Population
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_2">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2014">
          Indifference, Antipathy, Antisemitism
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2015">
          Hungarian Rescuers
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_12')">
        Regions of Destruction
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_12">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2016">
          The Capital: Budapest
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2033">
          A City in the Countryside: Balassagyarmat
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2034">
          A Village: Rákosszentmihály
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_4')">
        Women
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_4">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2017">
          Hungarian Jewish Women in the Kanadakommando
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2018">
          SS Female Overseers in Auschwitz
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2019">
        The First Massacre
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2020">
        Antisemitism
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2021">
        The Jewish Council
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2022">
        Resistance, Zionists
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_9')">
        Death Factory - Auschwitz-Birkenau 1944
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_9">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2023">
          Prisoners' Fate in Auschwitz-Birkenau
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2024">
          SS physicians
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2025">
          What did the Victims know?
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_10')">
        Rescue
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_10">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2026">
          Decent Gendarmes
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2027">
          Policemen
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2028">
          Humane Officials
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2029">
          The Military
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2030">
        Looting
       </a>
      </div>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2032">
       Labour Service
      </a>
      <script>
       toc('menu_12');toc('menu_12');
				if (current!=null) toc(current);
      </script>
     </div>
    </div>
   </div>
   <div id="footer">
   </div>
   <a href="http://degob.hu/index.php" style="text-decoration:none;" title="magyar">
    <div id="switch_banner" title="switch to Hungarian">
     váltás magyarra
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="bphm_banner">
    <a href="http://bphm.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="bphm.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/BPHM_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#1d3c51;font-size:9px;">
      bphm.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <div id="holomo_banner">
    <a href="http://www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/holo_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#5b4b32;font-size:9px;">
      holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <a href="index.php">
    <div id="home">
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="scroller">
    <object align="middle" classid="clsid:d27cdb6e-ae6d-11cf-96b8-444553540000" codebase="http://fpdownload.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=8,0,0,0" height="18" id="scroller" width="927">
     <param name="allowScriptAccess" value="sameDomain"/>
     <param name="movie" value="scroller_en.swf"/>
     <param name="quality" value="high"/>
     <param name="wmode" value="transparent"/>
     <param name="bgcolor" value="#000000"/>
     <embed align="middle" allowscriptaccess="sameDomain" bgcolor="#000000" height="18" name="scroller" pluginspage="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" quality="high" src="scroller_en.swf" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="927" wmode="transparent"/>
    </object>
   </div>
  </div>
  <script src="http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js" type="text/javascript">
  </script>
  <script type="text/javascript">
   _uacct = "UA-316143-2";
urchinTracker();
  </script>
 </body>
</html>
