<html>
 <head>
  <title>
   degob.org
  </title>
  <link href="degob.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
  <script language="JavaScript">
   <!-- Hide the script from old browsers --

	var current;

	function toc(toc_id) {

		toc_element = document.getElementById(toc_id);

		if ((toc_element.style.display=='none')||(toc_element.style.display=='')) {
			toc_element.style.display='block';
		}
		else {
			toc_element.style.display='none';
		}
	}


    // --end hiding here -->
  </script>
 </head>
 <body>
  <div id="wrapper">
   <div id="header">
   </div>
   <div id="main_wrapper">
    <div id="left_menu">
     <div id="left_menu_content">
      <a class="menu_main" href="?extsearch">
       Search
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php">
       Main page
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=203">
       On DEGOB
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2049">
       The Survivor Witnesses
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="?glossary">
       Glossary
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Encylopedia of Camps
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Supporters
      </a>
      <br/>
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="content_container">
     <div id="content">
      <div>
       <div style="float:left;display:inline">
        <h1 style="display:inline">
         Protocol Nr. 3309
        </h1>
       </div>
       <a href="?showjk_img=3309" style="text-decoration:none; color:#453c2d; ">
        <span style="vertical-align:middle; cursor:pointer; float:right; font-size:11px; width:126px; height:17px;  background-image:url('http://degob.hu/images/arrow_l.jpg'); background-repeat:no-repeat; color:#453c2d; font-weight:bold;">
         <span style="padding-left:30px;">
          scanned image
         </span>
        </span>
       </a>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both; margin-bottom:25px;">
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         P. E.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         female
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Nagysz?ll?s
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1908
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Nagysz?ll?s
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         merchant
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Ghetto
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Nagysz?ll?s (6 hét)
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Camps
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Auschwitz, Lübberstadt, Plőn
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
      </div>
      <br/>
      <br/>
      The person in question has given us the following information:

There were six of us brothers and sisters at home, now only two of us are left. 
I went to the ghetto together with my husband, and I can say that unfortunately 
the Hungarian gendarmes were much worse than the Germans. They took away all our 
money, we were only allowed to bring a blanket and some food with us. Our own 
gendarmes came into our houses, my husband and some other people were driven 
into the temple where they were beaten with rifle butts; how much I suffered 
through this time only God may tell. We were in the ghetto for four weeks, then 
we were taken to be entrained; mostly Hungarians and a few Germans did this 
disgraceful work. The streets were closed down and the people were staring at us 
like it was some spectacle. They crammed 78 people in a freight car, old people 
and children all mixed together, and made us leave towards our dark destiny. We 
were given no water on the journey. In Kassa the Germans took over. We arrived 
in Auschwitz after almost three days of horrible travelling. As we arrived, we 
felt completely dazzled by the quick turn of events. We immediately had to get 
off, while men and then old people were separated from us. We brothers and 
sisters tried to hold onto each other, but we were separated all the same. After 
this, we, who were young and strong, were taken to a bath, undressed, completely 
shaved, and then we had to wait for our destiny completely naked in the presence 
of German officers. How we felt cannot be described in words. Later we got grey 
prisoners clothes and non-matching pairs of male socks. We were not allowed to 
wear scarves on our heads, if we managed to get something for ourselves, it was 
taken away within a week. For two days after we arrived we had nothing to eat or 
drink. We were taken into a camp, where there were 600 of us in a block, ten of 
us lay in one bed, and after a week we were transferred to another camp. Then we 
thought we would be taken to the crematorium, but we were wrong, because they 
took us to Block 3. A few days later, I found out that my elder sister was in 
Block 6, so I fled there, and I found also two of my younger sisters there. In 
the meantime there were continuous selections, we lived in horror, which 
followed us from the beginning until the end, but here we were lucky because 
once all five of us  my sister-in-law was also there  were selected for a 
transport, and then taken to Camp D for a week, because we had no train. Once 
Mrs. Drechaler [Dreschler] came, with her huge bloodhound, undressed everybody, 
took away even our shoes, and we had to stand for hours completely naked, none 
of us were thinking of life any more, the gas chamber seemed unavoidable. But 
after a long time we got some clothes, although we remained here barefoot for 
more than a week. We lived under horrible conditions, roll calls in the 
courtyard at 8 am, there was no water, washing ourselves was out of the 
question; if we wanted to drink, we could only drink from puddles. I cannot even 
describe how much we suffered. One day after the roll call we were taken to the 
station and entrained. We got enough food for the journey, fifty of us travelled 
in a freight car, 2,800 of us started out, but 500 of us were detached during 
the journey. This was how we came to Lübberstadt. Here we were received very 
nicely, we were the first people in the camp. Our provisions were decent, we had 
cups, spoons, plates, cutlery; there was a proper bathroom where we could wash, 
so we were almost happy after Auschwitz. We had a day of rest, and then we were 
taken to an ammunition factory to work. Food was rather good in the beginning, 
we were not hungry for 3-4 weeks, but after that it was very bad, there was no 
grease or flour in the food at all. Later, we used all the ways to got hold of a 
little extra food; it was enviable if someone could obtain a few raw potatoes. 
In the meantime we had to do quite hard work. Later, my job was to drive the 
truck, which my colleagues had to push, because they were saving petrol through 
our work. We loaded a heavy truck with eight heavy bombs, and we had to push it 
8 kilometres long through hills and valleys from one shelter to another. Apart 
from the hard work, treatment was not so bad in the factory, but we were treated 
all the worse in the camp. We got severe punishment for the smallest offences, 
in winter we had to work without coats, and only when our liberation was 
approaching did treatment improve. When the frontline was very close, we had to 
depart on foot. We kept walking for 14 days and then continued by train. Our 
train was attacked and 70 people died, and we arrived in Pl?n in horrible 
conditions, where we were liberated. This was where our Lagerführer told us, 
There were six of us brothers and sisters at home, now only two of us are left. 
I went to the ghetto together with my husband, and I can say that unfortunately 
the Hungarian gendarmes were much worse than the Germans. They took away all our 
money, we were only allowed to bring a blanket and some food with us. Our own 
gendarmes came into our houses, my husband and some other people were driven 
into the temple where they were beaten with rifle butts; how much I suffered 
through this time only God may tell. We were in the ghetto for four weeks, then 
we were taken to be entrained; mostly Hungarians and a few Germans did this 
disgraceful work. The streets were closed down and the people were staring at us 
like it was some spectacle. They crammed 78 people in a freight car, old people 
and children all mixed together, and made us leave towards our dark destiny. We 
were given no water on the journey. In Kassa the Germans took over. We arrived 
in Auschwitz after almost three days of horrible travelling. As we arrived, we 
felt completely dazzled by the quick turn of events. We immediately had to get 
off, while men and then old people were separated from us. We brothers and 
sisters tried to hold onto each other, but we were separated all the same. After 
this, we, who were young and strong, were taken to a bath, undressed, completely 
shaved, and then we had to wait for our destiny completely naked in the presence 
of German officers. How we felt cannot be described in words. Later we got grey 
prisoners clothes and non-matching pairs of male socks. We were not allowed to 
wear scarves on our heads, if we managed to get something for ourselves, it was 
taken away within a week. For two days after we arrived we had nothing to eat or 
drink. We were taken into a camp, where there were 600 of us in a block, ten of 
us lay in one bed, and after a week we were transferred to another camp. Then we 
thought we would be taken to the crematorium, but we were wrong, because they 
took us to Block 3. A few days later, I found out that my elder sister was in 
Block 6, so I fled there, and I found also two of my younger sisters there. In 
the meantime there were continuous selections, we lived in horror, which 
followed us from the beginning until the end, but here we were lucky because 
once all five of us  my sister-in-law was also there  were selected for a 
transport, and then taken to Camp D for a week, because we had no train. Once 
Mrs. Drechaler [Dreschler] came, with her huge bloodhound, undressed everybody, 
took away even our shoes, and we had to stand for hours completely naked, none 
of us were thinking of life any more, the gas chamber seemed unavoidable. But 
after a long time we got some clothes, although we remained here barefoot for 
more than a week. We lived under horrible conditions, roll calls in the 
courtyard at 8 am, there was no water, washing ourselves was out of the 
question; if we wanted to drink, we could only drink from puddles. I cannot even 
describe how much we suffered. One day after the roll call we were taken to the 
station and entrained. We got enough food for the journey, fifty of us travelled 
in a freight car, 2,800 of us started out, but 500 of us were detached during 
the journey. This was how we came to Lübberstadt. Here we were received very 
nicely, we were the first people in the camp. Our provisions were decent, we had 
cups, spoons, plates, cutlery; there was a proper bathroom where we could wash, 
so we were almost happy after Auschwitz. We had a day of rest, and then we were 
taken to an ammunition factory to work. Food was rather good in the beginning, 
we were not hungry for 3-4 weeks, but after that it was very bad, there was no 
grease or flour in the food at all. Later, we used all the ways to got hold of a 
little extra food; it was enviable if someone could obtain a few raw potatoes. 
In the meantime we had to do quite hard work. Later, my job was to drive the 
truck, which my colleagues had to push, because they were saving petrol through 
our work. We loaded a heavy truck with eight heavy bombs, and we had to push it 
8 kilometres long through hills and valleys from one shelter to another. Apart 
from the hard work, treatment was not so bad in the factory, but we were treated 
all the worse in the camp. We got severe punishment for the smallest offences, 
in winter we had to work without coats, and only when our liberation was 
approaching did treatment improve. When the frontline was very close, we had to 
depart on foot. We kept walking for 14 days and then continued by train. Our 
train was attacked and 70 people died, and we arrived in Pl?n in horrible 
conditions, where we were liberated. This was where our Lagerführer told us, 
when we did not want to walk with him any more, that we were going towards 
freedom but he was going into captivity. This time he really wanted to be good 
to us and make us forget the sufferings of many months.

I do not have any plans, I hope to meet my husband and then we can decide about 
our fate together.
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="right_menu">
     <div id="right_menu_content">
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main_hu" href="index.php?showarticle=2031">
        The Holocaust in Hungary
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_1')">
        Perpetrators
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_1">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2011">
          The Gendarmerie
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2012">
          The Police
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2013">
          The Public Administration
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_2')">
        The Gentile Population
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_2">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2014">
          Indifference, Antipathy, Antisemitism
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2015">
          Hungarian Rescuers
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_12')">
        Regions of Destruction
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_12">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2016">
          The Capital: Budapest
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2033">
          A City in the Countryside: Balassagyarmat
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2034">
          A Village: Rákosszentmihály
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_4')">
        Women
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_4">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2017">
          Hungarian Jewish Women in the Kanadakommando
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2018">
          SS Female Overseers in Auschwitz
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2019">
        The First Massacre
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2020">
        Antisemitism
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2021">
        The Jewish Council
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2022">
        Resistance, Zionists
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_9')">
        Death Factory - Auschwitz-Birkenau 1944
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_9">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2023">
          Prisoners' Fate in Auschwitz-Birkenau
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2024">
          SS physicians
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2025">
          What did the Victims know?
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_10')">
        Rescue
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_10">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2026">
          Decent Gendarmes
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2027">
          Policemen
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2028">
          Humane Officials
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2029">
          The Military
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2030">
        Looting
       </a>
      </div>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2032">
       Labour Service
      </a>
      <script>
       toc('menu_12');toc('menu_12');
				if (current!=null) toc(current);
      </script>
     </div>
    </div>
   </div>
   <div id="footer">
   </div>
   <a href="http://degob.hu/index.php" style="text-decoration:none;" title="magyar">
    <div id="switch_banner" title="switch to Hungarian">
     váltás magyarra
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="bphm_banner">
    <a href="http://bphm.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="bphm.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/BPHM_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#1d3c51;font-size:9px;">
      bphm.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <div id="holomo_banner">
    <a href="http://www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/holo_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#5b4b32;font-size:9px;">
      holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <a href="index.php">
    <div id="home">
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="scroller">
    <object align="middle" classid="clsid:d27cdb6e-ae6d-11cf-96b8-444553540000" codebase="http://fpdownload.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=8,0,0,0" height="18" id="scroller" width="927">
     <param name="allowScriptAccess" value="sameDomain"/>
     <param name="movie" value="scroller_en.swf"/>
     <param name="quality" value="high"/>
     <param name="wmode" value="transparent"/>
     <param name="bgcolor" value="#000000"/>
     <embed align="middle" allowscriptaccess="sameDomain" bgcolor="#000000" height="18" name="scroller" pluginspage="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" quality="high" src="scroller_en.swf" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="927" wmode="transparent"/>
    </object>
   </div>
  </div>
  <script src="http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js" type="text/javascript">
  </script>
  <script type="text/javascript">
   _uacct = "UA-316143-2";
urchinTracker();
  </script>
 </body>
</html>
