<html>
 <head>
  <title>
   degob.org
  </title>
  <link href="degob.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
  <script language="JavaScript">
   <!-- Hide the script from old browsers --

	var current;

	function toc(toc_id) {

		toc_element = document.getElementById(toc_id);

		if ((toc_element.style.display=='none')||(toc_element.style.display=='')) {
			toc_element.style.display='block';
		}
		else {
			toc_element.style.display='none';
		}
	}


    // --end hiding here -->
  </script>
 </head>
 <body>
  <div id="wrapper">
   <div id="header">
   </div>
   <div id="main_wrapper">
    <div id="left_menu">
     <div id="left_menu_content">
      <a class="menu_main" href="?extsearch">
       Search
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php">
       Main page
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=203">
       On DEGOB
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2049">
       The Survivor Witnesses
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="?glossary">
       Glossary
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Encylopedia of Camps
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Supporters
      </a>
      <br/>
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="content_container">
     <div id="content">
      <div>
       <div style="float:left;display:inline">
        <h1 style="display:inline">
         Protocol Nr. 25
        </h1>
       </div>
       <a href="?showjk_img=25" style="text-decoration:none; color:#453c2d; ">
        <span style="vertical-align:middle; cursor:pointer; float:right; font-size:11px; width:126px; height:17px;  background-image:url('http://degob.hu/images/arrow_l.jpg'); background-repeat:no-repeat; color:#453c2d; font-weight:bold;">
         <span style="padding-left:30px;">
          scanned image
         </span>
        </span>
       </a>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both; margin-bottom:25px;">
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         R. J.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         female
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         ###
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1902
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Budapest
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         clerk
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Ghetto
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Budapest
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Camps
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Bergen - Belsen
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
      </div>
      <br/>
      <br/>
      The person in question has given us the following information:

I lived for several years in the 5th district of Budapest, Vörösmarty Street No. 
58/b. When Germans invaded the country they forced Jews to wear stars. As a 
clerk who had worked for the Wiener Verein for 15 years now I lost my job 
because of Jewish Laws. The # of June, 1944, the statute appeared that obliged 
Jews to move into starred houses that had been designated for this purpose. 
Consequently, I moved out from my apartment in Vörösmarty Street into a flat in 
Izabella Street No. 45. Three families lived in a two-room flat. One could leave 
the marked houses between 11 am and 5 pm. We were in this house when the Regent 
declared ceasefire. We were infinitely happy but soon had to be bitterly 
deluded. The Arrow Cross took away the inhabitants of starred houses, emptying 
one house after the other. For an entire week we could not go out. This was when 
the misery of the Jews started. They assaulted hard-working men and women on the 
pretext of the system of labour service. The people who remained could go out 
only for two hours between 12 am and 2 pm. In November 1944, they ordered Jews 
to move into the ghetto. Exceptions were made for those who were protected by 
neutral embassies. Since the goal of the embassies was to save as many Jews as 
possible it was easy to obtain a letter of protection. I managed to get two, and 
I started to hunt for a place in a protected house. At the end, I could enter 
the protected building in the 7th district, 90 Dohány Street, and took all my 
valuables and clothes with me. Much to my surprise, the inhabitants of the house 
told me one day that we had an hour to leave the place, since the protection of 
the house had been lost. As the time was short I could not bring all my stuff 
and two days later the Arrow Cross robbed the flat and stole my belongings. I 
moved into another protected house in the 5th district, 25 Sziget Street but a 
few days later, the Arrow Cross and the police appeared also here and took us to 
Teleki Square, where they singled out women between the age of 15 and 50, and 
took us to the railway station of Józsefváros, where they entrained us in a few 
minutes, and locked the door. Everything happened so fast and so unexpectedly 
that I was at a loss. People thought of freight cars as prisoners would think of 
the cell from where they would never return.
We travelled 40 of us in the car for 7 days till Zürndorf. During the day 
Hungarian gendarmes let us get off once so we could go to the toilet. We got no 
food and sustained ourselves with the little food we had taken from home. We 
stood for two days in the village of Ács, when I slowly set my mind on escaping. 
I even made a try with a friend of mine, and we almost did it when one of the 
gendarmes who stood on the roof of the train whose job was to guard us during 
the time we were off the train noticed us and brought us back. At the same time 
a labour serviceman managed to get away from another freight car. As a result 
they wanted to commit to death a great number of people in his car. His comrades 
could buy them off and get away with it only after long pleading and brutal 
beatings.
In Zürndorf we had a horrible impression when we noticed a group of around 150 
shabby, sick women, who had seen once better days as they approached us. They 
came on foot from the so-called death stall. They were put into two freight 
cars, and our number grew to 80 in the car, consequently we went the rest of the 
journey with numbed legs and arms. I have to mention that we travelled together 
with 9 mentally sick people from the psychiatry of Lipótmez? who had raging 
fits. There was also a head nurse called Bihari with them, further, there were 
some inhabitants of the Institute for the Deaf who kept uttering inarticulate 
lived for several years in the 5th district of Budapest, Vörösmarty Street No. 
58/b. When Germans invaded the country they forced Jews to wear stars. As a 
clerk who had worked for the Wiener Verein for 15 years now I lost my job 
because of Jewish Laws. The # of June, 1944, the statute appeared that obliged 
Jews to move into starred houses that had been designated for this purpose. 
Consequently, I moved out from my apartment in Vörösmarty Street into a flat in 
Izabella Street No. 45. Three families lived in a two-room flat. One could leave 
the marked houses between 11 am and 5 pm. We were in this house when the Regent 
declared ceasefire. We were infinitely happy but soon had to be bitterly 
deluded. The Arrow Cross took away the inhabitants of starred houses, emptying 
one house after the other. For an entire week we could not go out. This was when 
the misery of the Jews started. They assaulted hard-working men and women on the 
pretext of the system of labour service. The people who remained could go out 
only for two hours between 12 am and 2 pm. In November 1944, they ordered Jews 
to move into the ghetto. Exceptions were made for those who were protected by 
neutral embassies. Since the goal of the embassies was to save as many Jews as 
possible it was easy to obtain a letter of protection. I managed to get two, and 
I started to hunt for a place in a protected house. At the end, I could enter 
the protected building in the 7th district, 90 Dohány Street, and took all my 
valuables and clothes with me. Much to my surprise, the inhabitants of the house 
told me one day that we had an hour to leave the place, since the protection of 
the house had been lost. As the time was short I could not bring all my stuff 
and two days later the Arrow Cross robbed the flat and stole my belongings. I 
moved into another protected house in the 5th district, 25 Sziget Street but a 
few days later, the Arrow Cross and the police appeared also here and took us to 
Teleki Square, where they singled out women between the age of 15 and 50, and 
took us to the railway station of Józsefváros, where they entrained us in a few 
minutes, and locked the door. Everything happened so fast and so unexpectedly 
that I was at a loss. People thought of freight cars as prisoners would think of 
the cell from where they would never return.
We travelled 40 of us in the car for 7 days till Zürndorf. During the day 
Hungarian gendarmes let us get off once so we could go to the toilet. We got no 
food and sustained ourselves with the little food we had taken from home. We 
stood for two days in the village of Ács, when I slowly set my mind on escaping. 
I even made a try with a friend of mine, and we almost did it when one of the 
gendarmes who stood on the roof of the train whose job was to guard us during 
the time we were off the train noticed us and brought us back. At the same time 
a labour serviceman managed to get away from another freight car. As a result 
they wanted to commit to death a great number of people in his car. His comrades 
could buy them off and get away with it only after long pleading and brutal 
beatings.
In Zürndorf we had a horrible impression when we noticed a group of around 150 
shabby, sick women, who had seen once better days as they approached us. They 
came on foot from the so-called death stall. They were put into two freight 
cars, and our number grew to 80 in the car, consequently we went the rest of the 
journey with numbed legs and arms. I have to mention that we travelled together 
with 9 mentally sick people from the psychiatry of Lipótmez? who had raging 
fits. There was also a head nurse called Bihari with them, further, there were 
some inhabitants of the Institute for the Deaf who kept uttering inarticulate 
voices because of hunger and thirst.
In Zürndorf an officer of the Hungarian army handed us over to SS soldiers. One 
of them gave us a talk. He ordered us to take off the stars saying that we 
should not be considered Jews but in fact to create the impression that we were 
a group of people transported for work. From now on, Germans secured rations. 
They gave us two loaves of bread, margarine and cheese. The journey to Bergen-
Belsen lasted for 4 days. We tried to kill our thirst with snow.
SS soldiers received us in Bergen-Belsen. They kept whipping us while they 
escorted us into the barracks. We imagined the dimmest future. Instead, much to 
our surprise they put 400 of us into a "Sondern"-Lager. The 3rd of December, 
they had moved out Jews from the camp, who had left in the direction of 
Switzerland. These were people who had emigrated from Pest to Palestine. Now, we 
filled the liberated places. Our commander was a Jew from Szeged called Simon 
Fischer. The SS only controlled him since they regarded us as prisoners of war 
to be swapped. We did not have to work. Daily rations comprised 300 grams of 
bread, 7 decilitres of dense soup made of dried vegetables, black coffee in the 
evening with some margarine or lunch meat. Sometimes the soup was only 6 
decilitres. Sometimes we received from the Red Cross cigarettes and charity 
packs that made up for malnutrition.
A wire fence separated us from the rest of our companions: from the 54,000 
people who were kept in a miserable state. They got much less food but a lot 
more blows and had to do hard work. Death collected its victims here. Every day 
they carried away 6-7 wagons of cadavers in front of us. We anxiously asked 
ourselves whether our relatives were not among the corpses. Even if we had 
better rations and the camp was kept clean every day 10-12 people died also in 
our camp. Out of the 150 women who walked till the border, only around 12 
survived. The rest died of enteritis and many were the victims of typhus and 
other infectious diseases. 
The 9th of April, 1945, they entrained us and we started off towards 
Theresienstadt divided in 5 trains. No one knows about the first transport, the 
second one arrived in Theresienstadt with 52 cadavers and 120 injured, while our 
train transporting around 1,500 Dutch and around 400 women from Pest arrived in 
Pröbizt, a few kilometres from Berlin after a two weeks long journey with 
supplies for 4 days going up and down in the country. We starved a lot during 
this journey and killed our hunger for days with the turnip and beetroot that we 
had brought with us. The 23rd of April, Germans ordered us to get prepared as we 
were supposed to continue our journey on foot. Surprisingly, the SS did not come 
back to carry out the order not even an hour later. We lay down and when we woke 
up in the morning we found Russian cavalry in front of our freight car. We were 
freed from captivity and were immensely happy. Russians provided us ample food 
and accommodation and gave us everything we needed.
After a few days rest some of us decided to start back home on foot. Having 
walked for five days we arrived in Forst, where we entered a collecting camp, 
where there were already prisoners and deported people of various nations. After 
a three-week stay I managed to come home with the first Czech-Slovakian 
transport because I was born in Slovakia. Our train was decorated: it was full 
of banners and was celebrated everywhere along the route towards Pozsony across 
Prague. We spent a few hours in Prague and I was moved by the unforgettable way 
they received us. This is how we arrived in Budapest after 11 days of journey. 
It was a pleasure to see Budapest as I expected a completely ruined city. My old 
flat was five minutes from Nyugati railway station. I became nervous to find out 
what was waiting for me. I turned to the Lord with a grateful heart as I found 
my family home, my child and my husband who also survived deportation and was 
now a bag of bones and sick.
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="right_menu">
     <div id="right_menu_content">
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main_hu" href="index.php?showarticle=2031">
        The Holocaust in Hungary
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_1')">
        Perpetrators
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_1">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2011">
          The Gendarmerie
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2012">
          The Police
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2013">
          The Public Administration
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_2')">
        The Gentile Population
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_2">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2014">
          Indifference, Antipathy, Antisemitism
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2015">
          Hungarian Rescuers
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_12')">
        Regions of Destruction
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_12">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2016">
          The Capital: Budapest
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2033">
          A City in the Countryside: Balassagyarmat
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2034">
          A Village: Rákosszentmihály
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_4')">
        Women
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_4">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2017">
          Hungarian Jewish Women in the Kanadakommando
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2018">
          SS Female Overseers in Auschwitz
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2019">
        The First Massacre
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2020">
        Antisemitism
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2021">
        The Jewish Council
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2022">
        Resistance, Zionists
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_9')">
        Death Factory - Auschwitz-Birkenau 1944
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_9">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2023">
          Prisoners' Fate in Auschwitz-Birkenau
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2024">
          SS physicians
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2025">
          What did the Victims know?
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_10')">
        Rescue
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_10">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2026">
          Decent Gendarmes
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2027">
          Policemen
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2028">
          Humane Officials
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2029">
          The Military
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2030">
        Looting
       </a>
      </div>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2032">
       Labour Service
      </a>
      <script>
       toc('menu_12');toc('menu_12');
				if (current!=null) toc(current);
      </script>
     </div>
    </div>
   </div>
   <div id="footer">
   </div>
   <a href="http://degob.hu/index.php" style="text-decoration:none;" title="magyar">
    <div id="switch_banner" title="switch to Hungarian">
     váltás magyarra
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="bphm_banner">
    <a href="http://bphm.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="bphm.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/BPHM_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#1d3c51;font-size:9px;">
      bphm.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <div id="holomo_banner">
    <a href="http://www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/holo_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#5b4b32;font-size:9px;">
      holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <a href="index.php">
    <div id="home">
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="scroller">
    <object align="middle" classid="clsid:d27cdb6e-ae6d-11cf-96b8-444553540000" codebase="http://fpdownload.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=8,0,0,0" height="18" id="scroller" width="927">
     <param name="allowScriptAccess" value="sameDomain"/>
     <param name="movie" value="scroller_en.swf"/>
     <param name="quality" value="high"/>
     <param name="wmode" value="transparent"/>
     <param name="bgcolor" value="#000000"/>
     <embed align="middle" allowscriptaccess="sameDomain" bgcolor="#000000" height="18" name="scroller" pluginspage="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" quality="high" src="scroller_en.swf" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="927" wmode="transparent"/>
    </object>
   </div>
  </div>
  <script src="http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js" type="text/javascript">
  </script>
  <script type="text/javascript">
   _uacct = "UA-316143-2";
urchinTracker();
  </script>
 </body>
</html>
