<html>
 <head>
  <title>
   degob.org
  </title>
  <link href="degob.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
  <script language="JavaScript">
   <!-- Hide the script from old browsers --

	var current;

	function toc(toc_id) {

		toc_element = document.getElementById(toc_id);

		if ((toc_element.style.display=='none')||(toc_element.style.display=='')) {
			toc_element.style.display='block';
		}
		else {
			toc_element.style.display='none';
		}
	}


    // --end hiding here -->
  </script>
 </head>
 <body>
  <div id="wrapper">
   <div id="header">
   </div>
   <div id="main_wrapper">
    <div id="left_menu">
     <div id="left_menu_content">
      <a class="menu_main" href="?extsearch">
       Search
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php">
       Main page
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=203">
       On DEGOB
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2049">
       The Survivor Witnesses
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="?glossary">
       Glossary
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Encylopedia of Camps
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Supporters
      </a>
      <br/>
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="content_container">
     <div id="content">
      <div>
       <div style="float:left;display:inline">
        <h1 style="display:inline">
         Protocol Nr. 784
        </h1>
       </div>
       <a href="?showjk_img=784" style="text-decoration:none; color:#453c2d; ">
        <span style="vertical-align:middle; cursor:pointer; float:right; font-size:11px; width:126px; height:17px;  background-image:url('http://degob.hu/images/arrow_l.jpg'); background-repeat:no-repeat; color:#453c2d; font-weight:bold;">
         <span style="padding-left:30px;">
          scanned image
         </span>
        </span>
       </a>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both; margin-bottom:25px;">
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         L. J.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         male
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Makó
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1910
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Budapest
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         dental technician
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Concentration
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         labour service
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Camps
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Engerau, Mauthausen, Gunskirchen
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         S. T.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         male
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Csepel
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1910
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Budapest
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         headwaiter
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Concentration
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         labour service
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Camps
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Engerau, Mauthausen, Gunskirchen
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
      </div>
      <br/>
      <br/>
      The persons mentioned above have given us the following information:

Jewish Laws regarded me in as much as I had to join labour service in 1942, 
financially I suffered some disadvantages, but could continue working. /LJP./

The 15th of December, 1942, I was drafted for labour service in Monor. Having 
stayed there idle for a month I was dismissed, but a month later I was summoned 
again to Monor. Two weeks later, we came to Pest and the company was divided 
between five workplaces.

The 7th of July, 1943, we were entrained, travelled for 5 days and arrived in 
Transylvania, in a village called Réty. Working hours were long: we got home by 
10 pm, and every morning and evening we walked for 2 hours. Rations were 
terrible. People had to work for days without any bread living on a mess-tin of 
food. We climbed up in high mountains; we carried timber and dug ditches. This 
situation was essentially the same in each workplace. The commander of the 
company Lieutenant Gábor Vajnai treated the company quite sternly. He kept back 
and made disappear a great part of due rations. We could not prove anything, and 
when Röder visited the company, he found the book keeping all right, and could 
not see on what we had based our complaints. Later, this situation got somewhat 
better. The commander of the company was replaced by Lieutenant Tipari, who 
basically did not care about anything but handed over the whole business of 
command to his sub officer 2nd Lieutenant Tibor Hetény, the person who became 
later the commander of the company. Hetényi demanded hard work but had also a 
lot of compassion for the people, and the reason he made us work hard was 
because he wanted to make sure that people did not get into trouble because of 
idling. In our experience he was an extremely benevolent person.

When Russians approached us he posed the question: Shall we be captured or 
shall get home? Naturally, we wanted to return to our families. Using different 
forged passports we got back to Pest after travelling for 14 days in freight 
cars. In Pest we had temporary assignments, like loading coal, or carrying 
flour.

My experiences with non-Jews in Budapest do not let me complain. /LJP./ I live 
in a mixed marriage, my wife comes from a purely Christian family, like my 
friends /Sch. T./ and we have no complaints.

Our job kept us in Budapest till the 27th of November, when there was supposed 
to be a roll call at night, while a great part of the company was in the bound. 
In the evening armed soldiers with machine guns and automatics arrived and 
closed the gate and stood guard. In the morning the company was put on trucks 
and escorted to the Józsefváros railway station. We were waiting a few hours 
when a police officer and a gendarme staff sergeant gave the order to cram us 
into freight cars that were already full; as a result, 84 of us were in a 
freight car. We got no food; we had only what we took from the companys base. 
The train departed the day after, and the first time we got a soup was at the 
border at Hegyeshalom. Hungarian gendarmes escorted the train. They opened the 
cars to let us go to the toilet but in return they asked for golden watches, 
jewellery, and rings. They gave us also water but only for money. Some managed 
to get off car and run away. As far as I know one was also shot.

Hungarian gendarmes fell behind at Hegyeshalom, and handed us over to the German 
police. At the first Austrian station we stopped and got off to go to the toilet 
and to get food. This was when we saw the first Hungarian group shot dead. 
According to Germans they were the Hungarians who chased them to death, as they 
did the trip on foot and collapsed at the end. This group was made up of around 
20 people, both men and women. German police seized all tobaccos, razors and 
flashlights. A German officer confirmed that we would not be assaulted if we 
behaved in the right way. They relocked the cars and we travelled until Engerau.

When we arrived in Engerau we got off and the SA took charge of us, we were 
lodged in attics in groups of 150. Some groups were lodged in abandoned stalls, 
in windy, cold places, or in rooms with cement floors. We suffered a lot of cold 
and managed to obtain a stove only the 24th of December. We had to dig trenches 
in 12 hours a day. We walked one and a half hours to and back from workplace. 
Rations were coffee in the morning together with 25 grams of margarine, half a 
kilo of bread at noon and 3.5 decilitres turnip-drink in the evening. Quite a 
number of people died, generally of exhaustion. The company was made up of young 
men of the same generation all born in 1910. A few days later, guards called 
Politischer Leiters replaced the SA, amongst whom there were 4-5 horrible men, 
one can say they were sadists. These men would beat people to death without any 
reason. It happened more than once that a comrade of ours died at work because 
of beatings. We could use the tap in the court for bathing, however it got 
frozen during the cold winter. Getting frozen was normal: especially our feet 
and hands would get frozen. Later, lice appeared, which made the whole company 
of people much weaker. Once a week they would take us into a bath and kill the 
lice. We had to go out also in the coldest days, in snowstorms, at the most we 
returned earlier.

When Russians got closer the whole company had to set off at 10 pm and we 
marched all the night towards Deutschaltenburg. Several hundreds of people were 
killed on the way, people who fell behind or sat down a little to have a rest. 
At start we got bread and margarine for two days. They embarked us in Altenburg 
and during a six days long voyage they gave us nothing to eat. Many died during 
the voyage; we had to throw their corpses into the water. When we arrived the SS 
took charge of us and threw the agonising people in water, if someone tried to 
swim he was shot.

After this trip that lasted six days we arrived in Mauthausen, where they took 
us into the camp and put us in large blocks. We did not have to work. Rations 
were less than in Engerau and we started severely suffering of hunger. The SS 
stood guard outside, only a sergeant and a non-commissioned officer would come 
beat with clubs the people they could catch. It was quite normal that they would 
walk up and down and if there were people within a 10 metre radius they would 
give them strikes. They stole the greater part of our ration and sold it to us 
for the valuables we still had. Medical care existed only in theory, because 
they did not provide us any medicine or lint. The sick were placed in separate 
tents where they were waiting for death. Every day many of us died.

They evacuated us and we moved on into Gunskirchen in groups of 5000 because of 
Russian pressure. During a four-day-long walk we got bread and margarine only 
once. A huge number of people were shot now; people who could not keep the fast 
pace or who sat down. They also shot the people who were out of step. In our 
hunger, we ate grass and snails but that was also dangerous because they killed 
you if you were out of step.

When we arrived in Gunskirchen they put us into a barrack which was made to 
house 800 people calculating with three-storey bunkbeds, however there were no 
bunkbeds, and there was no floor either, as the barrack was not yet finished. 
First we lived here 1,800 of us, later 2,400. Lying down was out of the 
question; one could only stay in a sitting position day and night. Rations were 
even worse than in Mauthausen. It was completely uncertain what time we would 
get food if we got something at all. Our commander was an SS captain who 
encouraged us to resist as Americans were getting closer and the time of 
liberation was close. Nevertheless, he would not give us food from the huge 
magazines. I was informed later that there was a gas chamber prepared for the 
people of the camp, and he got the order to execute us, however, they failed to 
obey in order to save their necks, since Americans got closer and closer. The 
number of people who died of typhus was also high in this place. We were already 
in very bad conditions and I cannot really remember and give a precise account 
of things. If our savers had arrived 3-4 days later, we would have died since we 
were so enfeebled. The greatest problem was the toilet as only 8 people could 
use them contemporaneously in a camp where there were 16,000 people. They did 
not agree to have new latrines dug and several people died because they used 
other places as toilet. It was horrible how many lice we had around. For two 
weeks we got a litre water that we could use for drinking and washing ourselves. 
On the 23rd, we got charity packs but they seized the rice, cigarettes and 
chocolates claiming that they were going to use them for cooking for children. 
They carried away the packs that they considered superfluous by trucks.

Cadavers were lying in the mud for days; no one cared about them.

The 4th of May 1945, the first American car ran into the camp. They put on the 
white flag immediately, and the car took away the SS captain. During the night 
SS guards packed up the food in the camp and ran away, but were stopped by the 
American ring of troops, and were captured. I did not know what to do. The news 
spread from unknown sources that we had to move on to Nels. No one cared about 
us, while there were an immense number of sick and helpless people around. They 
were just lying and did not know what to do. No vehicles came, and no one 
provided us with food. We broke in the magazines and managed to obtain food. The 
5th of May, we started to walk towards Wels via Gunskirchen, where Americans 
opened a store and we could take whatever we wanted to. Unfortunately, there was 
only sugar there. We could eat it but it killed 23 people who got sick of it.

These were our own experiences.
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="right_menu">
     <div id="right_menu_content">
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main_hu" href="index.php?showarticle=2031">
        The Holocaust in Hungary
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_1')">
        Perpetrators
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_1">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2011">
          The Gendarmerie
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2012">
          The Police
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2013">
          The Public Administration
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_2')">
        The Gentile Population
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_2">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2014">
          Indifference, Antipathy, Antisemitism
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2015">
          Hungarian Rescuers
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_12')">
        Regions of Destruction
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_12">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2016">
          The Capital: Budapest
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2033">
          A City in the Countryside: Balassagyarmat
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2034">
          A Village: Rákosszentmihály
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_4')">
        Women
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_4">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2017">
          Hungarian Jewish Women in the Kanadakommando
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2018">
          SS Female Overseers in Auschwitz
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2019">
        The First Massacre
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2020">
        Antisemitism
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2021">
        The Jewish Council
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2022">
        Resistance, Zionists
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_9')">
        Death Factory - Auschwitz-Birkenau 1944
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_9">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2023">
          Prisoners' Fate in Auschwitz-Birkenau
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2024">
          SS physicians
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2025">
          What did the Victims know?
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_10')">
        Rescue
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_10">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2026">
          Decent Gendarmes
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2027">
          Policemen
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2028">
          Humane Officials
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2029">
          The Military
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2030">
        Looting
       </a>
      </div>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2032">
       Labour Service
      </a>
      <script>
       toc('menu_12');toc('menu_12');
				if (current!=null) toc(current);
      </script>
     </div>
    </div>
   </div>
   <div id="footer">
   </div>
   <a href="http://degob.hu/index.php" style="text-decoration:none;" title="magyar">
    <div id="switch_banner" title="switch to Hungarian">
     váltás magyarra
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="bphm_banner">
    <a href="http://bphm.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="bphm.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/BPHM_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#1d3c51;font-size:9px;">
      bphm.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <div id="holomo_banner">
    <a href="http://www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/holo_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#5b4b32;font-size:9px;">
      holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <a href="index.php">
    <div id="home">
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="scroller">
    <object align="middle" classid="clsid:d27cdb6e-ae6d-11cf-96b8-444553540000" codebase="http://fpdownload.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=8,0,0,0" height="18" id="scroller" width="927">
     <param name="allowScriptAccess" value="sameDomain"/>
     <param name="movie" value="scroller_en.swf"/>
     <param name="quality" value="high"/>
     <param name="wmode" value="transparent"/>
     <param name="bgcolor" value="#000000"/>
     <embed align="middle" allowscriptaccess="sameDomain" bgcolor="#000000" height="18" name="scroller" pluginspage="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" quality="high" src="scroller_en.swf" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="927" wmode="transparent"/>
    </object>
   </div>
  </div>
  <script src="http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js" type="text/javascript">
  </script>
  <script type="text/javascript">
   _uacct = "UA-316143-2";
urchinTracker();
  </script>
 </body>
</html>
