<html>
 <head>
  <title>
   degob.org
  </title>
  <link href="degob.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
  <script language="JavaScript">
   <!-- Hide the script from old browsers --

	var current;

	function toc(toc_id) {

		toc_element = document.getElementById(toc_id);

		if ((toc_element.style.display=='none')||(toc_element.style.display=='')) {
			toc_element.style.display='block';
		}
		else {
			toc_element.style.display='none';
		}
	}


    // --end hiding here -->
  </script>
 </head>
 <body>
  <div id="wrapper">
   <div id="header">
   </div>
   <div id="main_wrapper">
    <div id="left_menu">
     <div id="left_menu_content">
      <a class="menu_main" href="?extsearch">
       Search
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php">
       Main page
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=203">
       On DEGOB
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2049">
       The Survivor Witnesses
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="?glossary">
       Glossary
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Encylopedia of Camps
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Supporters
      </a>
      <br/>
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="content_container">
     <div id="content">
      <div>
       <div style="float:left;display:inline">
        <h1 style="display:inline">
         Protocol Nr. 3619
        </h1>
       </div>
       <a href="?showjk_img=3619" style="text-decoration:none; color:#453c2d; ">
        <span style="vertical-align:middle; cursor:pointer; float:right; font-size:11px; width:126px; height:17px;  background-image:url('http://degob.hu/images/arrow_l.jpg'); background-repeat:no-repeat; color:#453c2d; font-weight:bold;">
         <span style="padding-left:30px;">
          scanned image
         </span>
        </span>
       </a>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both; margin-bottom:25px;">
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         M. P.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         male
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Lazony
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1918
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Budapest
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
      </div>
      <br/>
      <br/>
      The person in question has given us the following information:

The institution of Vadász Street was initiated by the Zionist movements. The 
secretary of the Palestine Office Miklós Krausz had been in contact with the 
Swiss Embassy for a long time. It was the Embassy that took the responsibility 
to represent the countries that were in war with Hungary, including England. The 
Swiss Embassy conceded to giving protection to an office whose future job was to 
register those who applied for a certificate for Palestine. There were 7,800 of 
these certificates, or rather, the Palestine Office was told that 7,800 of these 
documents could be used as soon as the exit permits were issued.

The objective was then to register these 7,800 names and to start negotiations 
regarding the exit permits.

As we know, in these days when the office of the Embassy in Vadász Street was 
opened, the Lakatos government, which had already slackened the presence of 
fascism in Hungary, was ready to negotiate regarding these permits. The 
agreement was to issue a collective passport  I think for 1,500 people  what 
the Hungarian Ministry of the Interior would approve, thereafter also the 
Germans would give the exit permit if we meet certain conditions. The approval 
of the Hungarian Ministry of the Interior indeed arrived, but the case was 
obstructed by the Germans for a long time, and there was no chance to achieve 
anything.

Meanwhile we intensely worked in Vadász Street. These were times when a ray of 
hope would soon become certainty. Hundreds, thousands of people were applying 
for registration and the limit of 7,800 was soon surpassed, even the number of 
10,000. Masses of little photos were glued on the files and the one who managed 
to fill in the form was a happy person who felt his or her fate secured.

It was anyway typical of people of that time to sustain hopes and beliefs 
without difficulties, to catch at a straw, since there was no firm ground to 
stand on. 

It appeared to us that the first transport could successfully depart soon, 
however, all attempts failed. Germans did not know how to proceed. It was not 
only the lack of interest to save a few thousand Jews that mattered but also 
their great worry that people who knew the story of their misdeeds could get to 
neutral, or even inimical territories.

At the beginning of October, in the last days of the Lakatos government also the 
office in Vadász Street got calmer, since we now hoped that the war would finish 
soon and nothing serious would happen to Jews in the future.

October the 16th is a day to never forget. A few of us went to the office of 
Vadász Street in the morning and found an empty, deserted place. No one had the 
courage to come to a place which was Budapest-wide known to be the gathering 
point of Jews. Everyone was convinced that Vadász Street would be treated the 
same way as the Jewish houses that had been locked, and the people inside or 
nearby would be arrested and taken away. The owner of the house Arthur Weisz 
(later taken away and shot by the Arrow Cross) did not want to let us enter the 
building as he knew we lived in illegality and was worried he could also get 
into trouble if they find us there. We had to break in the door and enter by 
force.

The office in Vadász Street served us, who worked in the rescue team, often as a 
place where those issues could be resolved or activities be carried out that we 
could not do in the street or in a private flat. We were prepared (although we 
knew that to a certain point we took a risk) to provide people with forged 
documents or to negotiate with smugglers and with members of the resistance 
movement. Naturally, the heads of the office were not happy about it, and this 
led to several arguments but at the end it never gave reason for troubles.

Also now, on the 16th of October a few of us came in and decided to carry on 
working. In the following few days gradually a part of those people joined us 
who had an exemption from wearing the star (as officers of the Swiss Embassy or 
for other reasons) and thanks to the extraterritorial status of the building it 
was here where they stayed during the day. Slowly, people started also to move 
in since the Embassy let its officers to live there. Naturally, this became soon 
known to others and no one could stop the avalanche of those who wanted to live 
in the building. Brothers, parents, friends, acquaintances, Zionists and non-
Zionists came pleading and crying and the house got full illegally. The Embassy, 
especially ambassador Lutz later always acknowledged and approved that the 
number of people grew.

Circumstances became tougher: the space narrower, the supply more difficult, 
sanitation worse, outdoor activities more dangerous.

Once detectives of the Arrow Cross came but had to leave the premises furiously 
since they could not offend the right of the Swiss for extraterritoriality.

To a certain point the whole thing was only a bluff at the end, as nothing would 
have happened if one day they had just taken away all the inhabitants of the 
building. But somehow they did not have the courage to do so.

The chance that the emigration could happen became in fact really thin by now. 
As a consequence the Embassy appeared ready to give letters of protection to the 
7,800 registered people holding a certificate. It was only now that Vadász 
Street became really besieged. This news spread like fire. Thousands, maybe tens 
of thousands of people were queuing up in front of 29 Vadász Street - sometimes 
occupying the whole street and blocking the traffic - in order to receive 
letters of protection. In fact, a lot of them, or most of them risked their 
lives because they were there at the gate when Jews could not go out, many 
without a star. But for some reason the raids of the police and the Arrow Cross 
avoided this street, and nothing happened. On the other hand the office had 
connections to the police station in Vadász Street, which sent cordons of police 
every day. They sent policemen on horses who kept order using the baton because 
people risked breaking in the walls of the glass house. I got some batters, too, 
when I was hurrying through the crowd although I had a special card to enter the 
building.

As I had no moral inhibitions and felt no scruples towards the Nazis it was 
natural that it right away came to my mind that we could also produce 
Schutzpasses. We immediately had a seal made and stole forms from the Embassy to 
start preparing letters of protection. Unfortunately, the letter I was left 
out of the word "suisse" on our seal because of a mistake, so there was the 
danger that police would immediately find out that these were fake. Later, they 
indeed realised it in some cases. However, when distributing the Schutzpasses we 
did not tell the people that these were forged documents partly because we were 
afraid of betrayal and partly because it would have decreased their self-
confidence and they would have lost their composure. Therefore, we carried the 
fake documents to the Embassy and distributed them there to the people who were 
not on the list of 7,800 or could not get hold of it in another way. This was 
later not sufficient and we were forced to play the greatest bluff. We set up a 
completely fictitious embassy in 4 Perczell Mór Street, where we distributed now 
good fakes to those who applied for them. Very often there were masses waiting 
also there, fighting for the Schutzpasses which often meant salvation for them.

Interestingly enough, not only Jews but a great number of non-Jew policemen, 
soldiers, and clerks applied for Schutzpasses claiming that it would save them 
in front of the Russians. It happened that we indeed issued it for them, partly 
because we were convinced that it would not help them, partly because this way 
we could always extort some form of benefit, or privilege from a high officer.

The number of Schuztpasses increased this way maybe even to 100,000. Naturally, 
to some extent we let people cherish illusions, but still these letters of 
protection saved the life of innumerable people. A great number of labour 
service companies were saved by bringing them a letter of protection that 
addressed collectively a whole company.

In November-December Jews could hardly appear in the streets. This was the time 
when they set up the so-called Swiss houses where the Schutzpass-owners lived. 
This was the so-called foreign ghetto in Pozsonyi road. Conditions in Vadász 
Street became almost unbearable. There were already more than 2,000 people 
living in a single building, in the cellar, in the attic, filling all holes, 
sleeping and lying on tables, on the ground, on shelves, in constant dread that 
the Germans or the Arrow Cross was going to disrespect extraterritorial rights 
and take revenge on them when they see that the war is about to finish. Day by 
day sanitation became worse, food supply more difficult to provide. Also the 
Arrow Cross became more interested in us. Still people kept trying to get into 
this "Paradise". Although it was difficult to refute anyone, very often we had 
to get them to leave because of the interests of the community. The spies of the 
police also managed to get in so the police was perfectly well-informed about 
everything. There were weapons hid in the building, especially the young 
Zionists kept them who lived in the cellar, and who were prone to defend the 
house with arms in case it was attacked.

In the last weeks I did not go in any more, for almost every day a detective 
came to fetch me, a person who knew my name and had an exact description of my 
appearance. Nevertheless, I still occasionally slinked into the building in the 
evening, or kept in touch with them in another way. The people who lived in were 
hungry of news about the outside world and were always in need of something.

Once the Arrow Cross came by cars and forced everyone of Vadász Street to move 
out in front of the house without a coat or a hat. Almost everyone was out when 
the news arrived to Wekerle Sándor Street where there was another similar 
building of the Embassy. We were afraid the end came, the catastrophe arrived. 
The telephone started to work, we called everybody from the city military 
headquarters to the police headquarters, the Ministry of the Interior, the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, we called everyone, we tried to threaten them 
saying that we would immediately inform the Swiss government through a short-
wave broadcasting station and with similar bluffs, which some believed because 
of benevolence, some because of cowardice, and some because they had been 
bribed. In few minutes cars of the city military headquarters and of the police 
headquarters appeared with soldiers and policemen to get the Arrow Cross 
withdraw. 

By this time there was a bad relationship anyway between the Arrow Cross the 
soldiers and the police which led now almost to a fight between them. But 
apparently it was not worth fighting because of Jews, so the men of the Arrow 
Cross withdrew. The result of this attack was the death of three people and 
another person seriously wounded. They were shot when the Arrow Cross came in 
and someone raised his voice saying it was an extraterritorial premise.

Although there were no similar cases later on they could happen any minute and 
the nerves of the people were infinitely strained.

I want to speak about another tragic case. The Embassy had two cars for 
resolving problems in the country. One was driven by my friend, one of the heads 
of our movement Simcha Hunwald. This boy came back only recently from Ukraine 
after three years of labour service and immediately started working in Vadász 
Street with great zeal. This was where the half of the immense quantity of work 
was done. When we were distributing the Schutzpasses there were days when the 
leadership did not close their eyes as there was so much to do; while the 
impatient, disquiet, and upset masses had to be controlled and kept in order. I 
remember that another friend of mine Sándor Grossmann, who is known by many, did 
not sleep for weeks to manage the work of the officers and to get the greatest 
possible results.

But I come back to Simcha Hunwald. Once, when he arrived home by car he found 
one of the couriers of the building, a young Jewish boy dead in front of the 
gate. The Arrow Cross killed him a few minutes before when he left the house. 
Simcha Hunwald, although from the inside he was warned to come in straight away 
he went to the boy and looked at him. He cried up: "Who dared to do it?" In this 
moment two of the Arrow Cross went to him from the other side and took him away 
and also the car. We have not seen him since then.

Only a few more words! On the day of the liberation the hiding place in Vadász 
Street was occupied by a mentally and physically destroyed mass. Not to mention 
the damages caused by the Arrow Cross, the air raid shelter of the building was 
not big enough as the cellars were anyway full. It is a miracle that only a 
grenade hit the building wounding no one despite the severe bombing of the 
neighbourhood. Nervous-wrecks but saved people left the building and ran away 
from the dirt, lice and the already burdensome community. The mass, mostly made 
up of intelligent people fell in such a degraded, debased state that community 
life became impossible.
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="right_menu">
     <div id="right_menu_content">
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main_hu" href="index.php?showarticle=2031">
        The Holocaust in Hungary
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_1')">
        Perpetrators
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_1">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2011">
          The Gendarmerie
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2012">
          The Police
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2013">
          The Public Administration
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_2')">
        The Gentile Population
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_2">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2014">
          Indifference, Antipathy, Antisemitism
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2015">
          Hungarian Rescuers
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_12')">
        Regions of Destruction
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_12">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2016">
          The Capital: Budapest
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2033">
          A City in the Countryside: Balassagyarmat
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2034">
          A Village: Rákosszentmihály
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_4')">
        Women
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_4">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2017">
          Hungarian Jewish Women in the Kanadakommando
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2018">
          SS Female Overseers in Auschwitz
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2019">
        The First Massacre
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2020">
        Antisemitism
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2021">
        The Jewish Council
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2022">
        Resistance, Zionists
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_9')">
        Death Factory - Auschwitz-Birkenau 1944
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_9">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2023">
          Prisoners' Fate in Auschwitz-Birkenau
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2024">
          SS physicians
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2025">
          What did the Victims know?
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_10')">
        Rescue
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_10">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2026">
          Decent Gendarmes
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2027">
          Policemen
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2028">
          Humane Officials
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2029">
          The Military
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2030">
        Looting
       </a>
      </div>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2032">
       Labour Service
      </a>
      <script>
       toc('menu_12');toc('menu_12');
				if (current!=null) toc(current);
      </script>
     </div>
    </div>
   </div>
   <div id="footer">
   </div>
   <a href="http://degob.hu/index.php" style="text-decoration:none;" title="magyar">
    <div id="switch_banner" title="switch to Hungarian">
     váltás magyarra
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="bphm_banner">
    <a href="http://bphm.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="bphm.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/BPHM_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#1d3c51;font-size:9px;">
      bphm.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <div id="holomo_banner">
    <a href="http://www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/holo_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#5b4b32;font-size:9px;">
      holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <a href="index.php">
    <div id="home">
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="scroller">
    <object align="middle" classid="clsid:d27cdb6e-ae6d-11cf-96b8-444553540000" codebase="http://fpdownload.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=8,0,0,0" height="18" id="scroller" width="927">
     <param name="allowScriptAccess" value="sameDomain"/>
     <param name="movie" value="scroller_en.swf"/>
     <param name="quality" value="high"/>
     <param name="wmode" value="transparent"/>
     <param name="bgcolor" value="#000000"/>
     <embed align="middle" allowscriptaccess="sameDomain" bgcolor="#000000" height="18" name="scroller" pluginspage="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" quality="high" src="scroller_en.swf" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="927" wmode="transparent"/>
    </object>
   </div>
  </div>
  <script src="http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js" type="text/javascript">
  </script>
  <script type="text/javascript">
   _uacct = "UA-316143-2";
urchinTracker();
  </script>
 </body>
</html>
