<html>
 <head>
  <title>
   degob.org
  </title>
  <link href="degob.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
  <script language="JavaScript">
   <!-- Hide the script from old browsers --

	var current;

	function toc(toc_id) {

		toc_element = document.getElementById(toc_id);

		if ((toc_element.style.display=='none')||(toc_element.style.display=='')) {
			toc_element.style.display='block';
		}
		else {
			toc_element.style.display='none';
		}
	}


    // --end hiding here -->
  </script>
 </head>
 <body>
  <div id="wrapper">
   <div id="header">
   </div>
   <div id="main_wrapper">
    <div id="left_menu">
     <div id="left_menu_content">
      <a class="menu_main" href="?extsearch">
       Search
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php">
       Main page
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=203">
       On DEGOB
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2049">
       The Survivor Witnesses
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="?glossary">
       Glossary
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Encylopedia of Camps
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Supporters
      </a>
      <br/>
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="content_container">
     <div id="content">
      <div>
       <div style="float:left;display:inline">
        <h1 style="display:inline">
         Protocol Nr. 2476
        </h1>
       </div>
       <a href="?showjk_img=2476" style="text-decoration:none; color:#453c2d; ">
        <span style="vertical-align:middle; cursor:pointer; float:right; font-size:11px; width:126px; height:17px;  background-image:url('http://degob.hu/images/arrow_l.jpg'); background-repeat:no-repeat; color:#453c2d; font-weight:bold;">
         <span style="padding-left:30px;">
          scanned image
         </span>
        </span>
       </a>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both; margin-bottom:25px;">
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         B. A.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         female
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Budapest
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         19#5
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Budapest
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         factory worker
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Concentration
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         women's labour service
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Camps
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Auschwitz, Görlitz
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         S. H.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         female
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Voloc
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1929
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Voloc
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         high-school student
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Ghetto
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Munkács
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Camps
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Auschwitz, Mühldorf
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
      </div>
      <br/>
      <br/>
      The person in question has given us the following information:
 
The 13th of April 1944, Germans kicked us out of our flat and moved in. The 7 of 
us were crammed into the attic. We stayed here squashed together till the 18th 
of April, when at 6 am they announced that all Jews of the village had to gather 
in the temple by 8 am. First, my mother left the flat accompanied by two of my 
younger brothers. After a painful farewell I remained with my father, and the 
two of us started immediately to dig our valuables. My father was a well-off 
tradesman. He thought to secure for the future the capital for which he worked 
and fought all his life in case we should once return there by chance. When we 
finished this work also my father said good-bye to me and left for the 
designated place. I was unable to make myself do this move. I stayed in the 
flat, started to cry and bent on bed. This is how the patrol found me half an 
hour later. The patrol was made up of gendarmes; three of them entered the door 
headed by Corporal Szabó. "My lady, you do not know maybe that you should be in 
the temple?  Corporal Szabó said. Do not make troubles to your father defying 
the order. He leaned towards me and whispered in the ear: "Dont be afraid! I 
will make you escape still tonight, take my word!" He continued aloud: "I swear 
nothing bad would happen to you, theyll take you for agricultural work inside 
the country. I could not do else but to go into the temple although I stayed 
home because I wanted to escape.
We could bring money and documents in the temple but not clothes. There were 70 
families crammed here for three days. Every day twice a member of each family 
could leave the temple with an escort to procure food. In one of the cases my 
father went to see his best friend, the notary, and the police captain to 
inquire about our future. They equivocally declared we were going to do 
agricultural work within the borders of the country. This was what also others - 
friends and soldiers - reaffirmed. Although we had serious doubts we tried to 
believe it, thinking that there must be some truth in it if so many people said 
the same. The 19th of April, in the afternoon, I was queuing up for bread when I 
noticed ###.    
I knew him well. He came to me and asked me to escape, and also to let my 
parents know about it. He was to be waiting for us on the hill of vineyards and 
we were supposed to appear slowly one by one. When everyone arrived he was going 
to hide us. I rushed home and explained the plot to my father. He agreed but my 
mother started hesitating because of my two younger brothers, who could make the 
escape more difficult, and she was also kept back by the luggage. If they take 
us indeed for agricultural work in the country, well work and stay together 
with the children. Well go where the others go!" So we stayed.
The 19th of April, in the evening a committee of gendarmes came to the temple. 
Its members were: Corporal Szabó, non-commissioned officer Szász and a sergeant 
with a childs face, with moustache and pitted skin. The slogan was the same: we 
would do agricultural work within the borders of the country, and now they 
needed to register us.
 In the evening of the following day, they gathered us in a room together with 
our luggage and we could leave the room only one by one. We had to undress 
entirely, and they grabbed our valuables and better clothes. In the afternoon of 
the day after, we had to go into the ghetto of Munkács on our own expense 
carrying maximum 30 kilos of luggage. 
 In the gate of the ghetto there were two gendarmes who hit us with a belt. The 
ghetto was the Kálos brick factory. We arrived during the night at around 11-12 
pm. It was pitch-dark, and we had to sleep in deep mud in the open. My mother 
put my younger brother down and we also tried to have a sleep. At dawn it 
started raining. The night appeared to us like three years, three years of 
suffering. We were thirsty and tired and the rain went on pouring on us 
mercilessly. At daybreak we heard voices and realised there were other people 
around, that Jews had been crammed here from neighbouring villages. When we 
arrived no one was in the open and because it was so dark we believed we were 
the first people there. The day after we started to build barracks. It was the 
religious community that provided us food since the population of Munkács was 
still free, only the Jewry of the neighbouring villages had to move in. We had a 
relatively peaceful life, I cannot remember atrocities. The first transport left 
the 16th of May and consisted of around 3000 people. We did not know its 
destination. We left in the second transport with around the same number. Around 
500 people were left behind, who were later moved into the brick factory of 
Sajovics.
 There were 80, 90 and even 100 people crammed into a freight car. We could 
bring food, and we carried water to the train ourselves. We travelled for four 
days and nights. It happened that the train was still for a whole night. The 
worst thing was that we did not know where we were transported. The third day we 
arrived in Kassa where they opened the cars and we received some water and soup 
but already from the SS. Eight of us could share also a loaf of bread. Later, 
they targeted their weapons at us and forced us to produce the valuables and 
money that had not been seized yet. They even tugged a little girl and an old 
man off the train and targeted their pistols at them and threatened to shoot 
them unless they produced their alleged valuables. Someone threw a watch and a 
ring off the train and this saved their lives.
 Finally, we reached our destination, Auschwitz. We arrived at night. First, we 
did not know where we were and what we had to face but the idea that this 
tremendous journey, the state of being so crammed had now finished and we could 
finally get off was already a consoling one. But we could not be glad about it 
for long since our dear father managed to get to the window, looked out and saw 
prisoners in striped clothes, flames high in the sky, smoke, and the name of the 
station: Auschwitz! He only said: We are lost! Then he came to us and 
quietly told us to say farewell to each other. He tearfully hugged strongly my 
little brothers. My father had already heard about the horror of Auschwitz in 
the radio. Whatever quietly he spoke the others heard him and said: Dont say 
those things! Dont be an alarmist! You will see that well stay together, will 
work and survive the whole thing!" People were shouting around phrases like 
that.
 We stayed in for an hour, since they had to finish with another group first, 
then it was our turn. Men and women, children and elderly were separated. I 
remained on my own. I was taken into the baths, where they cut the hair off, 
took my dress, and left me only the shoes. I got grey clothes and was taken into 
barrack no. 26. There were 1500 of us here.
 For a week we stayed here completely ignorant about everything. We did not know 
what would come next and what had happened to those from whom we were separated. 
We got proper food: some bitter coffee or tea in the morning and the evening and 
some soup at noon. Daily bread was given to us also in the evening, around 330 
grams, and we even got margarine. When we asked the Blockältester what all those 
fires and smoke meant she responded, perhaps to console us: "We are just burning 
rags." It was only later that we got to know from the Kanadakommando that the 
corpses of our brothers had fed these fires. I stayed here for 2 months.
 One day suddenly they took away 350 people from our barrack, then again 150  
these were all people from Kassa and the destination was supposedly Hamburg. 
They selected another 200 people, amongst them also me. We had to give blood  
for soldiers, as they claimed  and were taken into the baths and put on freight 
cars.
 We went to Mühldorf, where there were only few men left. We were divided 
between two camps. There were 16 of us in a room, everyone had a bed. We got 
spoons, plates, and mugs. We cooked and cleaned for the Todt organization, 
consequently, our provisions were better. First, I was a courier, later I worked 
in a food store, and finally was transferred into the kitchen cooking for 
officers. Here we cooked together, 12 girls of Kassa for 12 soldiers and a woman 
soldier. Our provisions were excellent, we were also dressed well: we had coats, 
dresses, and shoes.
 When the frontline got closer discipline got gradually looser. Earlier, we 
could not have contact with men, now we were not hindered in visiting each 
other. We felt that the end was very close. One day I even agreed with a friend 
called Margit Weisz that we were going to escape the next time they took us for 
work, and would go to see the German woman soldier Erna Luchs, who had always 
been very nice to us.  
However, the day after we were not allowed to leave. They put together a 
transport of people and moved the whole camp into the Alps in Tirol. We girls, 
the 12 of us, and 100 men were left behind. This was arranged by the woman 
soldier and the SS Lagerführer. 8 days after the transport left, Americans 
arrived. We went to live in town and stayed for a month. When we learnt where 
the transport was taken we followed it to Feldafing, close to Munich. Here I met 
a cousin of mine. As we learnt that all members of the family died we decided to 
settle down there and open a pastry shop.
 A week later, we met a relative who told us that my oldest brother, who went 
through these hard times in Pest, was still alive and also was the husband of my 
cousin. We got on a train and travelled home. In the meantime, I learnt that my 
father and the other older brother died after the liberation. I cannot count on 
my mother and younger brothers. At the moment, I want to go to Prague to carry 
on studying. Later, I will grab the first opportunity to travel to our uncles 
place in America together with my brother.
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="right_menu">
     <div id="right_menu_content">
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main_hu" href="index.php?showarticle=2031">
        The Holocaust in Hungary
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_1')">
        Perpetrators
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_1">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2011">
          The Gendarmerie
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2012">
          The Police
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2013">
          The Public Administration
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_2')">
        The Gentile Population
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_2">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2014">
          Indifference, Antipathy, Antisemitism
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2015">
          Hungarian Rescuers
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_12')">
        Regions of Destruction
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_12">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2016">
          The Capital: Budapest
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2033">
          A City in the Countryside: Balassagyarmat
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2034">
          A Village: Rákosszentmihály
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_4')">
        Women
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_4">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2017">
          Hungarian Jewish Women in the Kanadakommando
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2018">
          SS Female Overseers in Auschwitz
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2019">
        The First Massacre
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2020">
        Antisemitism
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2021">
        The Jewish Council
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2022">
        Resistance, Zionists
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_9')">
        Death Factory - Auschwitz-Birkenau 1944
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_9">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2023">
          Prisoners' Fate in Auschwitz-Birkenau
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2024">
          SS physicians
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2025">
          What did the Victims know?
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_10')">
        Rescue
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_10">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2026">
          Decent Gendarmes
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2027">
          Policemen
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2028">
          Humane Officials
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2029">
          The Military
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2030">
        Looting
       </a>
      </div>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2032">
       Labour Service
      </a>
      <script>
       toc('menu_12');toc('menu_12');
				if (current!=null) toc(current);
      </script>
     </div>
    </div>
   </div>
   <div id="footer">
   </div>
   <a href="http://degob.hu/index.php" style="text-decoration:none;" title="magyar">
    <div id="switch_banner" title="switch to Hungarian">
     váltás magyarra
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="bphm_banner">
    <a href="http://bphm.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="bphm.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/BPHM_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#1d3c51;font-size:9px;">
      bphm.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <div id="holomo_banner">
    <a href="http://www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/holo_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#5b4b32;font-size:9px;">
      holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <a href="index.php">
    <div id="home">
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="scroller">
    <object align="middle" classid="clsid:d27cdb6e-ae6d-11cf-96b8-444553540000" codebase="http://fpdownload.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=8,0,0,0" height="18" id="scroller" width="927">
     <param name="allowScriptAccess" value="sameDomain"/>
     <param name="movie" value="scroller_en.swf"/>
     <param name="quality" value="high"/>
     <param name="wmode" value="transparent"/>
     <param name="bgcolor" value="#000000"/>
     <embed align="middle" allowscriptaccess="sameDomain" bgcolor="#000000" height="18" name="scroller" pluginspage="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" quality="high" src="scroller_en.swf" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="927" wmode="transparent"/>
    </object>
   </div>
  </div>
  <script src="http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js" type="text/javascript">
  </script>
  <script type="text/javascript">
   _uacct = "UA-316143-2";
urchinTracker();
  </script>
 </body>
</html>
