<html>
 <head>
  <title>
   degob.org
  </title>
  <link href="degob.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
  <script language="JavaScript">
   <!-- Hide the script from old browsers --

	var current;

	function toc(toc_id) {

		toc_element = document.getElementById(toc_id);

		if ((toc_element.style.display=='none')||(toc_element.style.display=='')) {
			toc_element.style.display='block';
		}
		else {
			toc_element.style.display='none';
		}
	}


    // --end hiding here -->
  </script>
 </head>
 <body>
  <div id="wrapper">
   <div id="header">
   </div>
   <div id="main_wrapper">
    <div id="left_menu">
     <div id="left_menu_content">
      <a class="menu_main" href="?extsearch">
       Search
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php">
       Main page
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=203">
       On DEGOB
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2049">
       The Survivor Witnesses
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="?glossary">
       Glossary
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Encylopedia of Camps
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Supporters
      </a>
      <br/>
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="content_container">
     <div id="content">
      <div>
       <div style="float:left;display:inline">
        <h1 style="display:inline">
         Protocol Nr. 3622
        </h1>
       </div>
       <a href="?showjk_img=3622" style="text-decoration:none; color:#453c2d; ">
        <span style="vertical-align:middle; cursor:pointer; float:right; font-size:11px; width:126px; height:17px;  background-image:url('http://degob.hu/images/arrow_l.jpg'); background-repeat:no-repeat; color:#453c2d; font-weight:bold;">
         <span style="padding-left:30px;">
          scanned image
         </span>
        </span>
       </a>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both; margin-bottom:25px;">
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         K. I.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         male
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Gyula
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1913
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         official of the International Red Cross
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
      </div>
      <br/>
      <br/>
      The person in question has given us the following information:

At the beginning of October, 1944, I worked for Department A, that is, for 
childrens department of the International Red Cross with its head office in 4 
Mérleg Street. My job was to administer less and more dangerous projects. As 
during this period call-up placards were placed practically every hour on the 
walls of the houses of Budapest and because (understandably) basically no one 
felt like being called up it was a part of our activity to produce forged 
documents including different kinds of baptismal certificates, exemption letters 
given by ammunition plants and by other organisations, etc. In practice we were 
manufacturing these documents on a large scale and distributed them to people of 
all social layers, ranks and religions.

From the office we went to brick factories and to other places where the Arrow 
Cross concentrated masses of Jews. Several times also György Aczél participated 
in these rescue actions (he is now the local leader of the Communist Party in 
the 5th district), and in several cases we managed to free the unfortunate Jews, 
especially women staying in the brick factory.

Later, 4 Mérleg Street became a temporary asylum especially for the part of 
enormous masses of children who were brought to the office or were often just 
dropped in front of the gate. People, Christians also kept on notifying us about 
children whose relatives had been taken away by the Arrow Cross and now stayed 
in abandoned flats lacking any supervision. Most of our energies were spent on 
collecting these Jewish orphans from the furthest points of the city, from the 
suburbs, from Angyalföld, etc. I remember a case when in Bulcsu Street we 
collected a large number of abandoned children and brought them to the office by 
car. We had so much work to do that we could hardly cope with it. We collected 
the children with the escort of the police.

Soon we had to provide their accommodation. We established a gathering and 
selecting office in 4 Perczel Mór Street where we took the children escorted by 
the police to distributed them among the different orphanages that we set up in 
the meantime. We were bringing and carrying children with no end. Later, we 
received the building in 16 Teleki Pál Street, where we gathered around 1,000 
children. There were other orphanages in 76 Szondy Street, 5-7 and 25 Munkácsy 
Mihály Street, and at different points of the city in a lot of places. 

When the surviving Jews of Budapest were put into the ghetto our rescue actions 
became even more frequent. The building in Mérleg Street was practically 
attacked by fugitives. Reports about abandoned children got more frequent. As it 
is well known, they published a decree that all Jews  including the children of 
orphanages  had to go into the ghetto. Delegate Weyermann managed to get a six- 
day-postponement regarding the transport of the orphanages, and added to it 
another 6 days, finally further 12 days.

Orphanages functioned relatively well despite adverse circumstances. Naturally, 
food was supplied by the International Red Cross.

In the days before Christmas, we had to take children often for walks with the 
escort of the police since the Arrow Cross appeared more and more frequently in 
one orphanage or another and demanded we transported the children into the 
ghetto immediately. Also on a sad day, just a few days before Christmas, they 
appeared in the orphanage of 5-7 Munkácsy Mihály Street. Party men of the Arrow 
Cross with signs of Árpáds stripes closed the street and surrounded the whole 
building. The building had military guards, a squad of Auxiliary Force Unit. 
Invading Arrow Cross men shot among the children killing around 10-15 children 
and some adults. They justified their act claiming that children defended 
themselves. The leader of the orphanage was Lajos Kraszner, who was later put 
into the ghetto.

When we returned to the orphanage with delegate Weyermann we found a horrifying 
scene. For example, in one of the armchairs two children were sitting embracing 
each other also in death. We found a walled up door barricaded with all kinds of 
furniture. We managed to save the people who survived uninjured in the room 
behind.

In another case, before this attack happened, the Arrow Cross took children 
away, claiming they were going to take them into Síp Street, but instead, they 
took them into an abandoned ruined house in Szív Street - as they claimed - out 
of mistake. When we were informed we rushed there and demanded the children from 
the janitor. We managed to get back around 200 children and smuggle them back 
into Munkácsy Street. 

Once, Arrow Cross gangsters appeared also in the orphanage of 112 Róna Street. 
They killed around 50-60 children who were kept there, the rest could run away. 
Also the officers of the institute, including its head Pál Vidor, lost their 
lives during this attack.

International Red Cross had a so-called T (transport) department. We went into 
the ghetto with this department and smuggled people out into places that had 
been arranged beforehand. This way we managed to free around 20 people from the 
ghetto helped by the police inside. It was anyway thanks to the policemen that 
we could freely enter and leave the ghetto and bring children out into the 
orphanages. Children in the ghetto lived in terrible squalor. We tried to 
smuggle out as many as possible but also those who remained depended on our food 
provisions.

I was the link between delegate Weyermann and the leader of Zionists Ottó 
Komoly. January the first, we were sitting together in the lobby of Ritz, when 
four men with signs of Árpáds stripes came to us and grabbed Ottó Komoly giving 
their word of honour that it was only about an inquiry and that they were going 
to bring him back in half an hour. Ottó Komoly has gone missing since then.

When the international ghetto was established the current ministerial secretary 
Dr György Gergely initiated to transform two buildings (16 and 23 Pozsonyi Road) 
into protected houses of the International Red Cross using forged documents. We 
came up with the idea that the International Red Cross was also a diplomatic 
institution, and as such we could protect the inhabitants of these houses like 
the Swiss, the Swedish, the Portuguese, the Spanish, or the papal legate 
protected others. There were around 1,500 men and women put up in these houses, 
who we gave excellent food supplies. These protected people were not touched nor 
molested by the Arrow Cross, they had to go the ghetto only the last week.
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="right_menu">
     <div id="right_menu_content">
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main_hu" href="index.php?showarticle=2031">
        The Holocaust in Hungary
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_1')">
        Perpetrators
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_1">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2011">
          The Gendarmerie
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2012">
          The Police
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2013">
          The Public Administration
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_2')">
        The Gentile Population
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_2">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2014">
          Indifference, Antipathy, Antisemitism
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2015">
          Hungarian Rescuers
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_12')">
        Regions of Destruction
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_12">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2016">
          The Capital: Budapest
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2033">
          A City in the Countryside: Balassagyarmat
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2034">
          A Village: Rákosszentmihály
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_4')">
        Women
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_4">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2017">
          Hungarian Jewish Women in the Kanadakommando
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2018">
          SS Female Overseers in Auschwitz
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2019">
        The First Massacre
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2020">
        Antisemitism
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2021">
        The Jewish Council
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2022">
        Resistance, Zionists
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_9')">
        Death Factory - Auschwitz-Birkenau 1944
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_9">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2023">
          Prisoners' Fate in Auschwitz-Birkenau
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2024">
          SS physicians
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2025">
          What did the Victims know?
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_10')">
        Rescue
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_10">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2026">
          Decent Gendarmes
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2027">
          Policemen
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2028">
          Humane Officials
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2029">
          The Military
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2030">
        Looting
       </a>
      </div>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2032">
       Labour Service
      </a>
      <script>
       toc('menu_12');toc('menu_12');
				if (current!=null) toc(current);
      </script>
     </div>
    </div>
   </div>
   <div id="footer">
   </div>
   <a href="http://degob.hu/index.php" style="text-decoration:none;" title="magyar">
    <div id="switch_banner" title="switch to Hungarian">
     váltás magyarra
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="bphm_banner">
    <a href="http://bphm.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="bphm.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/BPHM_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#1d3c51;font-size:9px;">
      bphm.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <div id="holomo_banner">
    <a href="http://www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/holo_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#5b4b32;font-size:9px;">
      holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <a href="index.php">
    <div id="home">
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="scroller">
    <object align="middle" classid="clsid:d27cdb6e-ae6d-11cf-96b8-444553540000" codebase="http://fpdownload.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=8,0,0,0" height="18" id="scroller" width="927">
     <param name="allowScriptAccess" value="sameDomain"/>
     <param name="movie" value="scroller_en.swf"/>
     <param name="quality" value="high"/>
     <param name="wmode" value="transparent"/>
     <param name="bgcolor" value="#000000"/>
     <embed align="middle" allowscriptaccess="sameDomain" bgcolor="#000000" height="18" name="scroller" pluginspage="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" quality="high" src="scroller_en.swf" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="927" wmode="transparent"/>
    </object>
   </div>
  </div>
  <script src="http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js" type="text/javascript">
  </script>
  <script type="text/javascript">
   _uacct = "UA-316143-2";
urchinTracker();
  </script>
 </body>
</html>
