<html>
 <head>
  <title>
   degob.org
  </title>
  <link href="degob.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
  <script language="JavaScript">
   <!-- Hide the script from old browsers --

	var current;

	function toc(toc_id) {

		toc_element = document.getElementById(toc_id);

		if ((toc_element.style.display=='none')||(toc_element.style.display=='')) {
			toc_element.style.display='block';
		}
		else {
			toc_element.style.display='none';
		}
	}


    // --end hiding here -->
  </script>
 </head>
 <body>
  <div id="wrapper">
   <div id="header">
   </div>
   <div id="main_wrapper">
    <div id="left_menu">
     <div id="left_menu_content">
      <a class="menu_main" href="?extsearch">
       Search
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php">
       Main page
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=203">
       On DEGOB
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2049">
       The Survivor Witnesses
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="?glossary">
       Glossary
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Encylopedia of Camps
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Supporters
      </a>
      <br/>
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="content_container">
     <div id="content">
      <div>
       <div style="float:left;display:inline">
        <h1 style="display:inline">
         Protocol Nr. 3523
        </h1>
       </div>
       <a href="?showjk_img=3523" style="text-decoration:none; color:#453c2d; ">
        <span style="vertical-align:middle; cursor:pointer; float:right; font-size:11px; width:126px; height:17px;  background-image:url('http://degob.hu/images/arrow_l.jpg'); background-repeat:no-repeat; color:#453c2d; font-weight:bold;">
         <span style="padding-left:30px;">
          scanned image
         </span>
        </span>
       </a>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both; margin-bottom:25px;">
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         K. S.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         female
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Sirok
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1916
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Budapest
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         housewife
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Camps
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Auschwitz, Bergen - Belsen
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
      </div>
      <br/>
      <br/>
      The person in question has given us the following information:


On the 20th of March 1944, arriving from Kolozsvár I was about to 
jump into a taxi with two of my friends when Hungarian policemen 
captured me and escorted me to the police station at Keleti 
railway station, where already a lot of Jews were kept. We were 
waiting for a while and finally heard the police officer saying 
"All in detention!"
We marched through dark streets packed with luggage and kept 
pleading with the policemen to let us go. They said I am really 
sorry for you, but we cannot do anything since you have been 
counted.

It belongs to one of the worst memories of my life when having 
arrived in the lock-up I saw the faces contorted with terror of 
Jews behind the bars expressing their despair. I only realised now 
what had indeed happened to us.

An unfriendly policeman stepped up to us and jammed us into a 
jail, where the windows had gratings and it was terribly cold. We 
could not sleep and got nothing to eat, not even the day after. We 
stayed together with prostitutes, who asked us when we were going 
to break free. I responded that they were going to be freed 
earlier since we were Jews We lay pressed to each other on the 
floor, on some iron cables without covers. Later, they brought 
other Jewish women so we had no place inside any more, and we lay 
outside on the cold concrete floor. 

Nights were the most awful because of horrible overcrowding. We 
suffered incredibly.

Four days later, they led me to see the police officer, who 
interrogated me and instructed the orderly to take me away. 28 of 
us remained in the lock-up, since very many people could get free 
using forged documents.

They put us in a huge room, where it was terribly cold. We kept 
hearing the alarm of patrol cars that carried Jews in the lock-up. 
A week later, they led us on foot to the railway station of the 
suburb train, and an hour later we arrived in Kistarcsa. 

When we arrived, they counted us in the yard, took us in a huge 
hall, where they newly searched our luggage. They seized all 
valuables I had, and put them in a great envelope that I had to 
sign. We did not lack food as I was sent food from home. They 
disinfected us, gave us back our own clothes but earlier we had to 
stand naked for hours in front of men. 

Six weeks later, we saw that all prisoners, including political 
ones, were standing in the yard ready to depart. They told us we 
were going to go to Sárvár to work on the lands. We lined up in 
fives and they counted us. The police officer declared he would 
shoot anyone who just moved a bit. They took us to Keleti railway 
station, where I tried to escape but unfortunately, I failed. One 
of my friends managed to run away till the next street 
(Rottenbiller street) where they captured her and wanted to shoot 
her to death. A German officer said they should leave her, that 
is, lead her back to the transport because in any case she would 
be executed in Germany.

There were 60 of us in a locked cattle car, but in the next second 
we had to get off while they kept beating us. They newly entrained 
us and now there were 70 of us crammed inside. They counted us 
three times and the German officer said we would be decimated if 
they did not count the same number on arrival. Hungarian policemen 
and SS soldiers managed our entrainment. They never opened the 
door of the car, and there was no opportunity for drinking or for 
the toilet. 

After two days and nights of horrible suffering we arrived to our 
destination: Auschwitz. They opened the door of the cattle car and 
Jewish men in striped cloth entered it and asked about our 
nationality, whether there were children and old people among us, 
and told us that they would carry our luggage to our place. So we 
left the packs in a great bunch.


We passed in fives in front of the camp doctor Dr Mengele and 
commander of the camp Kramer, and several SS soldiers. They said 
that whoever felt weak or pain in the legs should jump in the car 
with the sign of a red cross. They asked if there were doctors, 
pharmacists or chemists amongst us.


A friend of mine was a chemist and reported it. We were all moved 
by the fact that Germans carried the weak and the sick by cars. Dr 
Mengele asked another comrade of mine how old she was, and when 
she replied 46, she was selected for work, too. A friend of mine 
went to Dr Mengele and asked him to let another comrade of ours 
get on the car because she had a heart disease. She also got a 
place in a car, and unfortunately these people were all sent to 
the gas chamber. 

We arrived during the day and could see tidy gardens with flowers 
and could hear music. They led us into a block, into the so-called 
"Brezinka", where we spent half a day. Slovakian Jewish women 
immediately gave us tattoos. 

It belongs also to the worst memories of my life when we had to 
pass stark naked in front of the lines of SS-men with bayonets. 
Slovakian women inspected us while we had to hold our hands high. 
They led us to a long corridor, where Polish men newly inspected 
us. Then came disinfections; they cut our hair short, gave us thin 
summer dresses and high-heeled shoes in return for our own 
clothes. They put a red mark on the back of our clothes. 

They sent me to Camp A. We lived in stone barracks. Three days 
later, an SS soldier entered and said we had to go to work. 

It was quite cold, and we had to carry 50 kilos heavy cement sacks 
while the SS kept beating our backs with huge clubs. They declared 
that the road needed to be ready in ten days because all Hungarian 
Jews would arrive. We went to work at 1 pm and worked till 9 pm 
beaten and chased continuously. Three days later we saw with great 
anxiety that indeed newer transports arrived. 

One morning the block leader entered and said we were assigned 
another work. We were heading towards Brezinka and were convinced 
they would lead us in gas chamber because we were walking towards 
the crematoria. 

They commissioned us to work in Brezinka. We had to sort out the 
clothes of the people who arrived with the transports. Treatment 
and rations were quite ok, but we lived in an indescribable state 
of mind because we had to watch all the transports marching right 
into the gas chambers. Fire in the crematoria burned day and 
night. When the crematoria could not cope with the number of 
bodies to be burnt they carried out the corpses into a great pit, 
poured lime on them, put twigs and sticks on them and lit them. 

Once, when I was passing the crematorium I saw in dismay a huge 
truck full of corpses, and we could hear screams and cries for 
help. Our state of mind in these times could not be described. 

We often saw them opening the doors of cattle cars and corpses 
were literally falling out of the cars. A great many left the cars 
mad.

It belongs also to one of the unforgettable memories of my life 
when I saw ca. 30 elderly men and women on the huge truck of which 
the canvas was turned up by the wind as they were heading towards 
the gas chamber. In the court of the crematorium I saw elderly 
people sitting and eating at tables, waiting for their destiny to 
unfold. It was also horrible for me to see a young mother among 
the selected people as she was breastfeeding her baby kept in her 
arms, walking towards the crematorium.

I often saw the SS beating up men till blood poured from them. 
They fell on the ground but had to stand up at once. They were 
doing exercises in muddy puddles and got 25 blows for any trifle. 

When transports stopped coming we were moved from Brezinka to the 
weaving mill. Discipline was quite strict; SS soldiers used to 
come with great hounds to control whether the assigned work was 
done. If it was not done they mercilessly beat up people. 

Reveille was at 3 am, that is, when the sky was still full of 
stars, and was soon followed by roll call, which lasted for hours. 
At 6 am we had to leave for work. We were unable to get water. 
There was a streamlet, and during working hours we used it for 
washing and driven by thirst also for drinking. We walked in mud 
up to our ankles, and our heavy wooden shoes were frequently so 
stuck that we could hardly pull out our feet from the mud. 

At noon, when lunch was distributed they herded us out of the 
workplace as if we were beasts, and we had to eat standing, 
consuming the 2.5 decilitres of soup from a dirty and dusty pot. 
At 5 pm we finished working, then came roll call again, and then 
we ran into the bathroom to drink a sip of water but were chased 
back by clubs again. 

Every week there were disinfections, when we had to be lined up 
for roll call in front of the bathroom. We got a bite of bread and 
entered the baths, where the SS was already waiting for us with 
clubs. We had to rapidly take off our clothes and form a bunch of 
it. We had a bath in hot water and were herded to an ice-cold 
concrete room without windows, where we stood naked for hours, we 
stood there during the whole night on the icy concrete floor, till 
3 am, when our clothes were returned to us. We nestled up to each 
other to keep ourselves warm. If the number they counted during 
roll call was not right, as a punishment all the people of the 
camp had to stay on their knees for hours, on ice and mud.

I know of a so-called "Vistula kommando," where my comrades could 
endure only two weeks of work. If this kommando had existed for a 
longer time all of them would have died. All day long they had to 
pickaxe in mud and water. Every day they had to climb a high hill, 
which was rather difficult in those huge wooden shoes that got 
stuck in the mud. Most of them fell back and as a result they got 
a beating with the rubber club. One Friday, after a night of heavy 
raining, they had to work in a terrible windstorm. They thought to 
die there, and even the SS felt sorry for them, and soon they 
dismissed the kommando.

This time, I also got into the so-called "transport block." It was 
fairly cold outside; there was no heating in the block, and we 
were not allowed to use covers and the SS would control it. The 
wind blew in through the openings of the wall. The entire place 
was full of rats and if we left a bite of bread in the evening, by 
the morning rats would eat it out of our garments together with 
the textile. 

Two weeks later, we left with a transport (this was the first 
transport) for Bergen-Belsen, for the so-called death camp.

Conditions were awful also in these camps. For months we got 
nothing but 2 decilitres of soup, which was more like water, with 
a few slices of turnips swimming in it. Besides, we got a small 
slice of bread, but not every day. In the last weeks we received 
no bread, and starvation made us suffer in the extreme. 
Wherever you looked you saw dirt and squalor, while we were 
swarming with lice. There was no opportunity to wash; and hundreds 
of people died of spotted fever a day. No one saw to burying all 
those dead bodies that lay there in our midst; we trod on them. 
There was no toilet and everyone was forced to use the block as a 
toilet. 

Just before the English liberated us we heard that they were going 
to give us bread. Luckily, they had no time to distribute it 
because, as we heard, it was poisoned. 

The 15th of April of this year, our liberators, the English troops 
arrived. SS soldier had all escaped and handed over the camp to 
Hungarian soldiers. 

The first thing the English did was disinfect us, giving us the 
most nutritious food, clean tops and underwear. The English found 
more than 30,000 agonising people in this camp when they liberated 
us. Everyone was skeleton thin; and we literally went on all fours 
because of powerlessness. 
Unfortunately, most of us got diarrhoea and typhus because of the 
sudden change in nutrition, and very many people died also after 
liberation. 

When I got a bit stronger, I started home on my own. I crossed the 
Czech Republic and arrived in Budapest. 

Since I have found my husband  thank God! - ###
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="right_menu">
     <div id="right_menu_content">
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main_hu" href="index.php?showarticle=2031">
        The Holocaust in Hungary
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_1')">
        Perpetrators
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_1">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2011">
          The Gendarmerie
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2012">
          The Police
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2013">
          The Public Administration
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_2')">
        The Gentile Population
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_2">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2014">
          Indifference, Antipathy, Antisemitism
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2015">
          Hungarian Rescuers
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_12')">
        Regions of Destruction
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_12">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2016">
          The Capital: Budapest
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2033">
          A City in the Countryside: Balassagyarmat
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2034">
          A Village: Rákosszentmihály
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_4')">
        Women
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_4">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2017">
          Hungarian Jewish Women in the Kanadakommando
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2018">
          SS Female Overseers in Auschwitz
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2019">
        The First Massacre
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2020">
        Antisemitism
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2021">
        The Jewish Council
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2022">
        Resistance, Zionists
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_9')">
        Death Factory - Auschwitz-Birkenau 1944
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_9">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2023">
          Prisoners' Fate in Auschwitz-Birkenau
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2024">
          SS physicians
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2025">
          What did the Victims know?
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_10')">
        Rescue
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_10">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2026">
          Decent Gendarmes
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2027">
          Policemen
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2028">
          Humane Officials
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2029">
          The Military
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2030">
        Looting
       </a>
      </div>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2032">
       Labour Service
      </a>
      <script>
       toc('menu_12');toc('menu_12');
				if (current!=null) toc(current);
      </script>
     </div>
    </div>
   </div>
   <div id="footer">
   </div>
   <a href="http://degob.hu/index.php" style="text-decoration:none;" title="magyar">
    <div id="switch_banner" title="switch to Hungarian">
     váltás magyarra
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="bphm_banner">
    <a href="http://bphm.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="bphm.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/BPHM_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#1d3c51;font-size:9px;">
      bphm.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <div id="holomo_banner">
    <a href="http://www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/holo_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#5b4b32;font-size:9px;">
      holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <a href="index.php">
    <div id="home">
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="scroller">
    <object align="middle" classid="clsid:d27cdb6e-ae6d-11cf-96b8-444553540000" codebase="http://fpdownload.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=8,0,0,0" height="18" id="scroller" width="927">
     <param name="allowScriptAccess" value="sameDomain"/>
     <param name="movie" value="scroller_en.swf"/>
     <param name="quality" value="high"/>
     <param name="wmode" value="transparent"/>
     <param name="bgcolor" value="#000000"/>
     <embed align="middle" allowscriptaccess="sameDomain" bgcolor="#000000" height="18" name="scroller" pluginspage="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" quality="high" src="scroller_en.swf" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="927" wmode="transparent"/>
    </object>
   </div>
  </div>
  <script src="http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js" type="text/javascript">
  </script>
  <script type="text/javascript">
   _uacct = "UA-316143-2";
urchinTracker();
  </script>
 </body>
</html>
