<html>
 <head>
  <title>
   degob.org
  </title>
  <link href="degob.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
  <script language="JavaScript">
   <!-- Hide the script from old browsers --

	var current;

	function toc(toc_id) {

		toc_element = document.getElementById(toc_id);

		if ((toc_element.style.display=='none')||(toc_element.style.display=='')) {
			toc_element.style.display='block';
		}
		else {
			toc_element.style.display='none';
		}
	}


    // --end hiding here -->
  </script>
 </head>
 <body>
  <div id="wrapper">
   <div id="header">
   </div>
   <div id="main_wrapper">
    <div id="left_menu">
     <div id="left_menu_content">
      <a class="menu_main" href="?extsearch">
       Search
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php">
       Main page
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=203">
       On DEGOB
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2049">
       The Survivor Witnesses
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="?glossary">
       Glossary
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Encylopedia of Camps
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Supporters
      </a>
      <br/>
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="content_container">
     <div id="content">
      <div>
       <div style="float:left;display:inline">
        <h1 style="display:inline">
         Protocol Nr. 1076
        </h1>
       </div>
       <a href="?showjk_img=1076" style="text-decoration:none; color:#453c2d; ">
        <span style="vertical-align:middle; cursor:pointer; float:right; font-size:11px; width:126px; height:17px;  background-image:url('http://degob.hu/images/arrow_l.jpg'); background-repeat:no-repeat; color:#453c2d; font-weight:bold;">
         <span style="padding-left:30px;">
          scanned image
         </span>
        </span>
       </a>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both; margin-bottom:25px;">
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         H. M.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         female
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Huszt
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1929
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Huszt
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         housewife
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Ghetto
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Huszt
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Camps
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Auschwitz, Reichenbach, Parschnitz, Kratzau
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
      </div>
      <br/>
      <br/>
      The person in question has given us the following information:

I lived in Huszt with my father, who was a cellar master in a wine cellar. My 
mother died already three years ago. They jammed us in freight cars in the 
ghetto of Huszt, 75 people in a car  and deported us to Auschwitz. 

As soon as we arrived they separated us from each other. I remained with my 
elder sister and my stepmother. They took us into the baths, where they seized 
the few belongings we still had, cut our hair off, shaved our bodies, and gave 
us ragged clothes without any underwear. I was sent into Camp C, block 16. Our 
provision was grass soup that was made of pebbles, pieces of wood and coal. Roll 
call started already early in the morning and was repeated several times during 
the day. We were beaten for all possible and impossible reasons. If a woman 
called Grese came we had to stay on our knees sometimes even for eight hours. 
14-15 of us slept on a bunk. The block had no roof. Rain fell in and we were 
cold. New transports kept coming and we were not allowed to leave the hut when 
they arrived. If someone went out all the same the SS would catch her and beat 
her up so badly that blood would pour from her nose and mouth. We starved a lot 
since we had no chance to steal. We could not even keep a sack for the bread, 
and if someone did sew one for herself out of rags they would seize it. 

One morning the Aufseherin came to select people for a transport. Eighty of us 
were selected; she let brothers and sisters stay together. We travelled to 
Reichenbach by a personal car. At the station we got bread, margarine and 
sausage. We arrived in the camp by night, and we lay down on the berths, which 
still had no straw mattresses. Roll call was at six oclock in the morning. We 
got soup and bread, and everyone got porcelain bowls, cups, plates and also 
cutlery. We received good rations: each of us got one quarter of a loaf of 
bread, and there was also some kind of Zulag every day, and twice a day soup. We 
also got the provisions of civilians in the factory where we worked. Masters 
were good to us, and did not beat us. There was also a radio in the factory and 
we could listen to it, too. At 9:30 there was a half an hour break for a mid-
morning snack, and lunch break finished at 10:30. The manager always checked 
whether we got proper food. Things were also clean. We changed dresses every 
week. We got soap, washing powder, and once a week we could have a warm bath in 
the factory. 

In February, heavy air raids started. The factory was bombed to pieces. 
Casualties were numerous, but only the Germans were hit. Thanks to some 
miraculous luck, no Jews were hurt at all. The Germans of course watched us with 
some superstitious awe and envy. They took us to Parschnitz. 

We walked for five days in February. The snow was deep, and we climbed high 
mountains. We felt a terrible hunger as we got only some bread for the journey 
but nothing else. We arrived in a dirty camp where rations were awful: they 
cooked only potato peels for us and gave us one eighth of a loaf of bread. We 
dug trenches for 5 weeks. There was a Serbian SS-man who kept encouraging us 
that it would not last for long, we only had to survive a few more weeks. He 
kept telling us to work slowly and speed up only when the master was coming. 
Unfortunately, the Aufsehers were replaced so it was not always him who watched 
us. Some of the Aufsehers would beat us with their rifle butts if they were in 
the mood. 

One day Dr Mengele appeared. When we noticed him we got incredibly scared, and 
believed we had to die for certain. He did indeed select people but it was quite 
a light one, only a few of us were selected. 

We went to Krazau. We travelled in open wagons for three days. Rain and snow 
fell in. A very nasty Kommandoführer received us, who beat us a lot. We got 
proper rations, there was soup also in the morning, and one sixth of a loaf of 
bread. On Sundays, we always had good lunches with peas and potatoes. The 
manager of the factory made sure also here that they cooked for us in a proper 
manner. No one stole anything. Many French prisoners of war were kept here, and 
they were very kind and good to us. They encouraged us that it would not last 
more than a few days. We received packs from the Red Cross with lump sugar, 
cheese and anchovy paste. 

Once, girls returned from the factory with the news that the French had told 
them that we did not need to work any longer. Hence, when the Kommandoführer 
ordered Antreten for the night shift, the girls of the shift did not want to 
leave. He beat them with a rubber belt. Nevertheless, the next shift was indeed 
sent back, and they were told that we did not have to work any more. It was on 
the 6th of April. The SS came on the 8th in the morning, and wanted to blow up 
the camp. We did not go to work; the camp was already closed, and only the 
French guarded it so that no one could approach it. 

The manager of the factory came to give us a talk. He said he was always pleased 
with us, and now he asked us to remain disciplined until the last minutes. 

That was how we were waiting for the liberation, and the Russians in fact 
arrived on the 9th of April.
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="right_menu">
     <div id="right_menu_content">
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main_hu" href="index.php?showarticle=2031">
        The Holocaust in Hungary
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_1')">
        Perpetrators
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_1">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2011">
          The Gendarmerie
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2012">
          The Police
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2013">
          The Public Administration
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_2')">
        The Gentile Population
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_2">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2014">
          Indifference, Antipathy, Antisemitism
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2015">
          Hungarian Rescuers
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_12')">
        Regions of Destruction
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_12">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2016">
          The Capital: Budapest
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2033">
          A City in the Countryside: Balassagyarmat
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2034">
          A Village: Rákosszentmihály
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_4')">
        Women
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_4">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2017">
          Hungarian Jewish Women in the Kanadakommando
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2018">
          SS Female Overseers in Auschwitz
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2019">
        The First Massacre
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2020">
        Antisemitism
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2021">
        The Jewish Council
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2022">
        Resistance, Zionists
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_9')">
        Death Factory - Auschwitz-Birkenau 1944
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_9">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2023">
          Prisoners' Fate in Auschwitz-Birkenau
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2024">
          SS physicians
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2025">
          What did the Victims know?
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_10')">
        Rescue
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_10">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2026">
          Decent Gendarmes
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2027">
          Policemen
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2028">
          Humane Officials
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2029">
          The Military
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2030">
        Looting
       </a>
      </div>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2032">
       Labour Service
      </a>
      <script>
       toc('menu_12');toc('menu_12');
				if (current!=null) toc(current);
      </script>
     </div>
    </div>
   </div>
   <div id="footer">
   </div>
   <a href="http://degob.hu/index.php" style="text-decoration:none;" title="magyar">
    <div id="switch_banner" title="switch to Hungarian">
     váltás magyarra
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="bphm_banner">
    <a href="http://bphm.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="bphm.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/BPHM_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#1d3c51;font-size:9px;">
      bphm.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <div id="holomo_banner">
    <a href="http://www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/holo_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#5b4b32;font-size:9px;">
      holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <a href="index.php">
    <div id="home">
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="scroller">
    <object align="middle" classid="clsid:d27cdb6e-ae6d-11cf-96b8-444553540000" codebase="http://fpdownload.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=8,0,0,0" height="18" id="scroller" width="927">
     <param name="allowScriptAccess" value="sameDomain"/>
     <param name="movie" value="scroller_en.swf"/>
     <param name="quality" value="high"/>
     <param name="wmode" value="transparent"/>
     <param name="bgcolor" value="#000000"/>
     <embed align="middle" allowscriptaccess="sameDomain" bgcolor="#000000" height="18" name="scroller" pluginspage="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" quality="high" src="scroller_en.swf" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="927" wmode="transparent"/>
    </object>
   </div>
  </div>
  <script src="http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js" type="text/javascript">
  </script>
  <script type="text/javascript">
   _uacct = "UA-316143-2";
urchinTracker();
  </script>
 </body>
</html>
