<html>
 <head>
  <title>
   degob.org
  </title>
  <link href="degob.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
  <script language="JavaScript">
   <!-- Hide the script from old browsers --

	var current;

	function toc(toc_id) {

		toc_element = document.getElementById(toc_id);

		if ((toc_element.style.display=='none')||(toc_element.style.display=='')) {
			toc_element.style.display='block';
		}
		else {
			toc_element.style.display='none';
		}
	}


    // --end hiding here -->
  </script>
 </head>
 <body>
  <div id="wrapper">
   <div id="header">
   </div>
   <div id="main_wrapper">
    <div id="left_menu">
     <div id="left_menu_content">
      <a class="menu_main" href="?extsearch">
       Search
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php">
       Main page
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=203">
       On DEGOB
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2049">
       The Survivor Witnesses
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="?glossary">
       Glossary
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Encylopedia of Camps
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Supporters
      </a>
      <br/>
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="content_container">
     <div id="content">
      <div>
       <div style="float:left;display:inline">
        <h1 style="display:inline">
         Protocol Nr. 3043
        </h1>
       </div>
       <a href="?showjk_img=3043" style="text-decoration:none; color:#453c2d; ">
        <span style="vertical-align:middle; cursor:pointer; float:right; font-size:11px; width:126px; height:17px;  background-image:url('http://degob.hu/images/arrow_l.jpg'); background-repeat:no-repeat; color:#453c2d; font-weight:bold;">
         <span style="padding-left:30px;">
          scanned image
         </span>
        </span>
       </a>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both; margin-bottom:25px;">
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         K. D.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         male
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Gyetva
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1880
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Budapest
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         merchant
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Camps
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Dachau
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
      </div>
      <br/>
      <br/>
      The person in question has given us the following information:

On the 14th of November 1944, I was heading towards my flat when 
people were being captured already in the courtyard of the 
building. It happened already twice that they collected people for 
work but they always let people older than 60 return home. When I 
arrived there was great confusion but some Christian people warned 
me already on the way home that something was going to happen. 
When we arrived I saw that Jews were taken away. I thought they 
were being taken into the ghetto. I was not aware of what was 
happening. My wife was in bed having had a severe nervous 
breakdown, and I told her that they were going to take me away, 
too, and she insisted she would come with me at any price. It 
happened only a month before that my daughter had been taken away 
for labour service and it had a great effect on my wife. I knew 
how upset she was so I did not even try to convince her to stay 
home. Even if she had stayed home I do not know what would have 
happened to her since all Jews had to gather in a designated area. 
I was even happy that she came with me. When we were in the brick 
factory I tried to report that my wife was sick but no one 
listened to me. We started our march through Piliscsaba, where I 
learned in the market square, where we slept in the open, that 48 
people from the previous transport of 3,000 people had died, out 
of whom 30 committed suicide and the rest were frozen in the cold. 
In our group only 16-18 people passed away. On our way to Komárom 
we saw women and men lying in the ditch, most of them had already 
departed this life, and this had a horrible effect on us, so we 
arrived in an awful mood. There were no horse-drawn wagons here 
anymore but even if there had been we would not have been allowed 
to get on them. So we continued on foot. My wife was extremely 
apathetic and tired so we fell behind the group. They warned us 
beforehand that wild things were going on in Komárom. Suddenly, we 
found ourselves atthe market of Komárom, where I wanted to buy 
apples but was not allowed. A young Arrow Cross kid came to us and 
said: "I see! You were going to escape. Well find a better place 
for you in Csillagvár!" and they took us somewhere where they 
registered our data and then they took us to the headquarters of 
the Arrow Cross. There were already 20-30 of us here, and now we 
had to enter a room one by one. We still had the valuables we 
could carry with us. They seized here everything and left us only 
some invaluable stuff that was later taken away in Dachau. This 
was early in the morning, and we were waiting there till 5 pm, 
when they gathered us and led us to the Csillag fortress. They did 
not punish us here but took away all our documents. They promised 
to return the documents to us before we departed but it did not 
happen. This was where they separated me from my wife, who I could 
still see for a minute on the third day. Later, on the 5th of 
November, women were taken away allegedly in the direction of 
Berlin. I remained in Komárom till the 16th of December. Treatment 
was severe but was not unbearable. They sorted out people day 
after day but we hoped that some political change might save us 
soon from deportation to Germany. But this did not happen. On the 
16th of December we were put into freight cars  there were around 
1,500 of us  and each of us received a loaf of bread, some kind 
of sausage and cheese and later on the way also some jam. We were 
in horrible condition because we could not move, since there were 
around 60 of us crammed into a freight car. This unpleasant travel 
made us terribly exhausted but we still cherished the hopes that 
people older than 60 might be singled out at Hegyeshalom and sent 
back. Unfortunately, this was not the case. On the 21st of December 
we got off the train at Dachau. We stood there for a long, long 
while before they made us undress in the baths and that was how 
they led us into a room where they seized everything we had, and 
then we could go under the showers. That was where they seized 
also my glasses that I lacked so much later on, because we became 
later so full of lice, that lice were swarming on our bodies and I 
could have killed them only with my glasses on. But they did not 
return my glasses to me no matter how much I begged for them. Then 
we had to wait in the baths for a long while. Bathing was later 
the most horrible thing that could happen to us (we had a bath 
once a month) because they would seize all that we managed to 
collect during a month, all our valuable treasures. Later, they 
took us to the baths already at dawn and we had to stand there 
till late evening while the windows were open and it was terribly 
cold. When we (finally) entered the baths there were already 5-6 
dead people laying there whose immune system did not function. 
Once, it happened that they gathered our clothes saying that they 
would return them soon but we did not get them back so we had to 
walk completely naked from the baths to the block; they gave us 
only shoes. That was how we walked through the camp in the wind, 
the rain and the cold. I have gastric disorders and we got food 
that I should not have eaten. But we starved so much that no one 
cared about anything but food. Later, I got double rations because 
I became the scribe of the block. I had to suffer an immense 
quantity of mental and physical pain. They did not treat us badly 
except for Polish and Russian (I mean Ukrainian) people, who were 
nasty. I got a smack only once. As I have said I was a scribe so I 
had three covers. For that reason a brutal scoundrel gave me a 
huge smack but I suffered no other atrocities. Quarantine was 
long, therefore, we had roll calls at the most 15 times 
altogether, which were horrible enough. Roll calls lasted for us a 
maximum of an hour, so we were in a better situation. First, I got 
into block no. 25, where a hotel man from Bruno called Moravek was 
the leader and he treated us in a very nasty way. Later, I got 
into another block where the heads were Polish priests and they 
treated us in a very nice way. On the 24th of April, they took out 
all the Jews  but only the Jews  and we got extremely scared 
because we thought they were going to do something. Indeed, they 
were. They took us to Tirol although they told us that they were 
going to carry us to Switzerland but everybody knew that this was 
not the case, and that they were after something else. When they 
took us to the railway station we went by passenger cars and that 
was when we received the first Dutch charity packs, which 
contained first-class food, margarine, gingerbread, cheese, so 
these packs saved the lives of many. When we were in the block 15-
30 people died every day while no one died later on the road. I 
have to add here that I never fell sick with anything. Sick people 
with typhus were lying right next to me but I fortunately did not 
get infected, I only had a temperature of 38 degrees C once but 
that was because of myositis. We spent 4-5 days in the passenger 
cars, and on the fifth day we left for Tirol. First we got off in 
Seefeld, which is a nice little town in Tirol and where the radio 
announced that the war was over. We decided not to reveal our 
happiness in any way because we suspected that an agent 
provocateur was spreading the news. However, secretly we hoped the 
news were true. Now, they took us to a river where we spent 3 days 
and nights. They were already shooting everywhere all the time and 
we believed they were going to chase us into the river. But 
Americans were already very close and three days later we started 
heading backwards and saw that the Germans were running away in a 
panic. One day, we arrived on the side of a mountain and a few of 
us slept here in a barn while they were cannoning all night long. 
The following day Americans were there early in the morning and 
gave us all the good things. Particularly, a black soldier was 
nice to us who distributed with a smile the ca. 10 kilos of 
cheese, the tea and other food. They gave me also medicine because 
I had diarrhoea. Still the same day we walked in Garmicsh-
Partenkircher, which was around 12 kilometres away. We spent 
around 3 months here. I have to note that it left a bad taste in 
my mouth (even after the mental and physical pains of camp life) 
that Americans could not care less about organising the return of 
deported people to their home country. I thought alout about my 
relatives, of my wife, till finally I managed to join a Czech 
transport and arrive in Budapest on the 23rd of September.
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="right_menu">
     <div id="right_menu_content">
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main_hu" href="index.php?showarticle=2031">
        The Holocaust in Hungary
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_1')">
        Perpetrators
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_1">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2011">
          The Gendarmerie
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2012">
          The Police
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2013">
          The Public Administration
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_2')">
        The Gentile Population
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_2">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2014">
          Indifference, Antipathy, Antisemitism
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2015">
          Hungarian Rescuers
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_12')">
        Regions of Destruction
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_12">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2016">
          The Capital: Budapest
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2033">
          A City in the Countryside: Balassagyarmat
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2034">
          A Village: Rákosszentmihály
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_4')">
        Women
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_4">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2017">
          Hungarian Jewish Women in the Kanadakommando
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2018">
          SS Female Overseers in Auschwitz
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2019">
        The First Massacre
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2020">
        Antisemitism
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2021">
        The Jewish Council
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2022">
        Resistance, Zionists
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_9')">
        Death Factory - Auschwitz-Birkenau 1944
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_9">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2023">
          Prisoners' Fate in Auschwitz-Birkenau
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2024">
          SS physicians
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2025">
          What did the Victims know?
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_10')">
        Rescue
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_10">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2026">
          Decent Gendarmes
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2027">
          Policemen
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2028">
          Humane Officials
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2029">
          The Military
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2030">
        Looting
       </a>
      </div>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2032">
       Labour Service
      </a>
      <script>
       toc('menu_12');toc('menu_12');
				if (current!=null) toc(current);
      </script>
     </div>
    </div>
   </div>
   <div id="footer">
   </div>
   <a href="http://degob.hu/index.php" style="text-decoration:none;" title="magyar">
    <div id="switch_banner" title="switch to Hungarian">
     váltás magyarra
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="bphm_banner">
    <a href="http://bphm.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="bphm.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/BPHM_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#1d3c51;font-size:9px;">
      bphm.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <div id="holomo_banner">
    <a href="http://www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/holo_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#5b4b32;font-size:9px;">
      holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <a href="index.php">
    <div id="home">
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="scroller">
    <object align="middle" classid="clsid:d27cdb6e-ae6d-11cf-96b8-444553540000" codebase="http://fpdownload.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=8,0,0,0" height="18" id="scroller" width="927">
     <param name="allowScriptAccess" value="sameDomain"/>
     <param name="movie" value="scroller_en.swf"/>
     <param name="quality" value="high"/>
     <param name="wmode" value="transparent"/>
     <param name="bgcolor" value="#000000"/>
     <embed align="middle" allowscriptaccess="sameDomain" bgcolor="#000000" height="18" name="scroller" pluginspage="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" quality="high" src="scroller_en.swf" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="927" wmode="transparent"/>
    </object>
   </div>
  </div>
  <script src="http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js" type="text/javascript">
  </script>
  <script type="text/javascript">
   _uacct = "UA-316143-2";
urchinTracker();
  </script>
 </body>
</html>
