<html>
 <head>
  <title>
   degob.org
  </title>
  <link href="degob.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
  <script language="JavaScript">
   <!-- Hide the script from old browsers --

	var current;

	function toc(toc_id) {

		toc_element = document.getElementById(toc_id);

		if ((toc_element.style.display=='none')||(toc_element.style.display=='')) {
			toc_element.style.display='block';
		}
		else {
			toc_element.style.display='none';
		}
	}


    // --end hiding here -->
  </script>
 </head>
 <body>
  <div id="wrapper">
   <div id="header">
   </div>
   <div id="main_wrapper">
    <div id="left_menu">
     <div id="left_menu_content">
      <a class="menu_main" href="?extsearch">
       Search
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php">
       Main page
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=203">
       On DEGOB
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2049">
       The Survivor Witnesses
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="?glossary">
       Glossary
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Encylopedia of Camps
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Supporters
      </a>
      <br/>
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="content_container">
     <div id="content">
      <div>
       <div style="float:left;display:inline">
        <h1 style="display:inline">
         Protocol Nr. 3617
        </h1>
       </div>
       <a href="?showjk_img=3617" style="text-decoration:none; color:#453c2d; ">
        <span style="vertical-align:middle; cursor:pointer; float:right; font-size:11px; width:126px; height:17px;  background-image:url('http://degob.hu/images/arrow_l.jpg'); background-repeat:no-repeat; color:#453c2d; font-weight:bold;">
         <span style="padding-left:30px;">
          scanned image
         </span>
        </span>
       </a>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both; margin-bottom:25px;">
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         dr. N. T.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         male
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         head of the Aid Department
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
      </div>
      <br/>
      <br/>
      The person in question has given us the following information:

After the Germans invasion of Hungary some internment camps were established in 
Budapest and Csepel. I took part in the work of the Supportive Office and the 
Jewish Council in providing and distributing food and cloth and in giving other 
kind of technical support to these camps.

These camps were the following:

1. in the centre was the registry office and the administration: 26 Rökk Szilárd 
Street, the building of the seminary for rabbis. Its head was the assistant 
draftsman of the police Dr. Pál Ubrizsy (who was one of the greatest hangmen of 
the world).

Camps belonging to Rökk Szilárd Street:
2. the camps of Csepel:
a) Tsuk yard
b) Mauthner yard, both were internment camps for civilians
c) Horthyliget, military internment camp
d) Királyerdő, as auxiliary camp
e) Herminamajor, as auxiliary camp.

"Their specialities": Tsuk: it was only for those registered by the National 
Central Authority for Controlling Foreigners; 
Mauthner: for those who were caught by local authorities (on train, on the 
border of a locality, in escape, etc.), furthermore, for the prominent persons, 
that is, for those who had been individually searched for.

Horthy-liget: A place for those who were captured according to the list of 
registered Jewish journalists and lawyers, ca. 3-500 people.

Királyerdő, and Herminamajor: these had only secondary importance compared to 
the three aforementioned large camps. Average number of people in Királyerdő was 
30-40, in Herminamajor was 20-30.

Tsuk camp: This was the site of the fur manufactory Tsuk holding, which was not 
functioning any more. Authorities closed all usable halls of the factory, and 
designated the stores and the two cellars as the places for the interned. These 
rooms were in an indescribable condition lacking the most basic structures, 
there was not even glass in the windows, etc. The latrine was for instance half 
metre from the windowless cellar so that its smell was everywhere. There were 
only two taps to be used for hygienic purposes, for bathing. These conditions 
become unthinkable if we add that 90% of the interned in this camp were over 60 
years, but at least 50% was over 70, and that there were rooms occupied by 
people over 90. The head of the camp was an interned Jewish doctor who did 
everything that humanely could be done to make the rooms of the camp tolerable 
and to put up the interned. The Council helped the camp financially as much as 
it was able to but the initial circumstances were so absurd that it was 
impossible to keep here a throng of 7-900 people for a longer period of time.

According to the well-known rule during air raids interned people had to stay in 
the courtyard, later, in the open. There were several flaks nearby, and since 
the port of the Danube (Szabadkikötő), Nagyvásártelep and the Weiss Manfréd 
factory were only 1-200 metres from it, the prisoners of the camp had to put up 
with air attacks basically without pause. The area of the camp went through 25 
air raids but in the most miraculous way no bomb fell the camp. As a result of 
long negotiations and begging German authorities allowed us to group the 
children below the age of 16 in a separate camp. Although this preventive 
measure was an advantage for the children it meant separation from the parents 
who lived in the most insecure state. Nevertheless, we hoped this measure would 
contribute to the chances of survival of the children, and we took away ca. 16-
20 children from the camp around mid June. Only 2-3 weeks passed and the entire 
Tsuk yard was evacuated and its prisoners were deported to Auschwitz. Since, as 
I have said, around 90% of the inhabitants were above the age of 60, there can 
be no doubt about their fate at the selections in Auschwitz.

This is how 700 people passed away from this life after three months of 
inhumane, ruthless maltreatment.

Mauthner-yard. During the first air raids the Mauthner works - specialised on 
grain - situated next to the Weiss Manfréd factory was also a target of the 
attacks. It was made public that in order to avoid further attacks they would 
set up an internment camp in the store only 2-3 metres from the oil company that 
had been already hit. The head of the camp was a frustrated officer of the 
factory, a member of the Arrow Cross, who  with regards to his past - hoped to 
have a leading role in the plant after the change of rule. As I have said these 
hopes were frustrated, so he eagerly cursed the Arrow Cross while he also gave 
vent to his antisemitism that remained unchanged. Consequently through certain 
measures it was possible to soften his attitude.

Living conditions were basically better than on Tsuk yard, from a hygienic point 
of view they were much more satisfying. This is where among others the actor 
Sándor Radó, the world famous sportsman Alfréd Brüll and many other remarkable 
people of the Hungarian Jewish society were kept. 

Obersturmbannführer Krumey, who was the assistant to Eichmann, the man in charge 
of Jewish affairs in Budapest, visited the site a number of times giving the 
order to prepare groups of certain number of people for deportation. This was 
however averted by the captain of the camp as we could exploit his above 
mentioned attitude.

At the beginning of July this camp was also evacuated. First, people were 
transported to Békásmegyer, later they shared the horrible fate of the other 
Jews of Hungary.

Horthy-liget. This is the worst chapter in the story of the interned in Hungary. 
Following the heaviest bombings during the first air raids against the Dunai 
Aircraft Factory, authorities decided to set up an internment camp for civilians 
placed under military control. This was first guarded by Hungarian soldiers, 
later by the controllers of the workers of the Dunai holding, that is, those 
whose profession was to pester and spy on the labourers. The interned were kept 
in the stalls, which were half ruined by the air raids and their job was to 
clear the debris on the site of the aircraft factory in 12 hours a day.

I present only one case to illustrate the conditions of life in this camp: Ernő 
Kivgel, who worked for the Hungarian News Agency , got into the camp with a 
personal call-up. In the year before, he had had an apoplexy. Hard work caused 
him another apoplexy, so he lay down after work. But as it was customary Jews 
had to present a running contest including jumping over hurdles also that day, 
to entertain the soldiers. The half paralysed, disabled Ernő Kügel was carried 
to the site and was ordered to run. As he was unable to do so he was terribly 
beaten and carried back to his place. The day after the doctor of the camp let 
him stay in, since he was unable to move anyway. When his companions returned 
from work Ernő Kügel was carried again to the ground and now was ordered to 
jump. Ernő Kügel, half dead, was naturally unable to do so; he was beaten up 
again. The day after, in the morning I managed to take him away (together with 
another person who had gone mad because of the beatings) with the excuse that it 
would be unpleasant for the camp if he died there. It was a special miracle that 
Ernő Kugel got cured. He was caught again by the Gestapo, went through again 
this inquisitional misery, but survived his second arrest, too.

The commander of all these camps was, as I have said, the assistant draftsman of 
the police Pál Ubrizsy, who had unlimited power and influence despite his young 
age and the lack of any rank. He was one of those matchless figures of these 
times in the style of Endre and Baky. A sadist hangman, who delighted in his 
power and in the torment of his victims.

It is not needed to speak about Rökk Szilárd Street as the history of the damned 
institute has been described in numerous books and articles by the writers and 
journalist who stayed there.
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="right_menu">
     <div id="right_menu_content">
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main_hu" href="index.php?showarticle=2031">
        The Holocaust in Hungary
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_1')">
        Perpetrators
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_1">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2011">
          The Gendarmerie
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2012">
          The Police
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2013">
          The Public Administration
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_2')">
        The Gentile Population
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_2">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2014">
          Indifference, Antipathy, Antisemitism
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2015">
          Hungarian Rescuers
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_12')">
        Regions of Destruction
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_12">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2016">
          The Capital: Budapest
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2033">
          A City in the Countryside: Balassagyarmat
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2034">
          A Village: Rákosszentmihály
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_4')">
        Women
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_4">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2017">
          Hungarian Jewish Women in the Kanadakommando
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2018">
          SS Female Overseers in Auschwitz
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2019">
        The First Massacre
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2020">
        Antisemitism
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2021">
        The Jewish Council
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2022">
        Resistance, Zionists
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_9')">
        Death Factory - Auschwitz-Birkenau 1944
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_9">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2023">
          Prisoners' Fate in Auschwitz-Birkenau
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2024">
          SS physicians
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2025">
          What did the Victims know?
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_10')">
        Rescue
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_10">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2026">
          Decent Gendarmes
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2027">
          Policemen
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2028">
          Humane Officials
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2029">
          The Military
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2030">
        Looting
       </a>
      </div>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2032">
       Labour Service
      </a>
      <script>
       toc('menu_12');toc('menu_12');
				if (current!=null) toc(current);
      </script>
     </div>
    </div>
   </div>
   <div id="footer">
   </div>
   <a href="http://degob.hu/index.php" style="text-decoration:none;" title="magyar">
    <div id="switch_banner" title="switch to Hungarian">
     váltás magyarra
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="bphm_banner">
    <a href="http://bphm.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="bphm.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/BPHM_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#1d3c51;font-size:9px;">
      bphm.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <div id="holomo_banner">
    <a href="http://www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/holo_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#5b4b32;font-size:9px;">
      holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <a href="index.php">
    <div id="home">
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="scroller">
    <object align="middle" classid="clsid:d27cdb6e-ae6d-11cf-96b8-444553540000" codebase="http://fpdownload.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=8,0,0,0" height="18" id="scroller" width="927">
     <param name="allowScriptAccess" value="sameDomain"/>
     <param name="movie" value="scroller_en.swf"/>
     <param name="quality" value="high"/>
     <param name="wmode" value="transparent"/>
     <param name="bgcolor" value="#000000"/>
     <embed align="middle" allowscriptaccess="sameDomain" bgcolor="#000000" height="18" name="scroller" pluginspage="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" quality="high" src="scroller_en.swf" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="927" wmode="transparent"/>
    </object>
   </div>
  </div>
  <script src="http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js" type="text/javascript">
  </script>
  <script type="text/javascript">
   _uacct = "UA-316143-2";
urchinTracker();
  </script>
 </body>
</html>
