<html>
 <head>
  <title>
   degob.org
  </title>
  <link href="degob.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
  <script language="JavaScript">
   <!-- Hide the script from old browsers --

	var current;

	function toc(toc_id) {

		toc_element = document.getElementById(toc_id);

		if ((toc_element.style.display=='none')||(toc_element.style.display=='')) {
			toc_element.style.display='block';
		}
		else {
			toc_element.style.display='none';
		}
	}


    // --end hiding here -->
  </script>
 </head>
 <body>
  <div id="wrapper">
   <div id="header">
   </div>
   <div id="main_wrapper">
    <div id="left_menu">
     <div id="left_menu_content">
      <a class="menu_main" href="?extsearch">
       Search
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php">
       Main page
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=203">
       On DEGOB
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2049">
       The Survivor Witnesses
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="?glossary">
       Glossary
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Encylopedia of Camps
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Supporters
      </a>
      <br/>
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="content_container">
     <div id="content">
      <div>
       <div style="float:left;display:inline">
        <h1 style="display:inline">
         Protocol Nr. 279
        </h1>
       </div>
       <a href="?showjk_img=279" style="text-decoration:none; color:#453c2d; ">
        <span style="vertical-align:middle; cursor:pointer; float:right; font-size:11px; width:126px; height:17px;  background-image:url('http://degob.hu/images/arrow_l.jpg'); background-repeat:no-repeat; color:#453c2d; font-weight:bold;">
         <span style="padding-left:30px;">
          scanned image
         </span>
        </span>
       </a>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both; margin-bottom:25px;">
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         S. J.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         female
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Badalo
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1917
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Beregszász
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         day worker
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Concentration
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         labour service
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Camps
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Eisenetz, Mauthausen, Günskirchen
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
      </div>
      <br/>
      <br/>
      The person in question has given us the following information:

Around 6,000 Jews lived in Beregszász. They were mostly craftsmen and tradesmen 
but there were also doctors and lawyers among them. I lived relatively well and 
as far as I know others lived well, too.

The first antisemitic measures were taken in 1938. Militiamen invaded the area 
and beat up Jews in the street, broke the windows and plundered the Jews.

In 1939, they withdrew trade licences and seized shops. It was Mayor Dr Kálmán 
Hubay who took these measures. Leaders of the religious community and the rabbi 
went to the municipal authority several times but all they got were empty 
promises but no support.
In 1940, I was drafted for labour service in Munkács and on the same day, the 
21st of November 1940, I was dismissed because of a medical opinion. Later, in 
the middle of June 1941, I was drafted for labour service in Mátészalka. We 
stayed there for four weeks before we were transferred to Huszt to work on an 
airfield. We worked here till around the middle of September 1940 before we went 
to a place close to Nagybánya, where we stayed for around four weeks. My company 
was dismissed as it was from the reserves but since I did not join up as a 
reservist I was taken to Kassa, where we stayed for two weeks before we moved on 
to Huszt, where we stayed one and half years. Conditions in Kassa (Huszt) were 
not very good as the officers were sappers who treated us very badly. There was 
a staff sergeant who was very nasty with us both when we worked and when we did 
not. They came to control us all the time and found fault in everything. On 
order of a staff sergeant called Furek we had to go running to the workplace. We 
worked on a hill and if it rained in the winter we got back home always full of 
mud. One and a half years later we returned to Kassa where we stayed idle for 
two weeks before we moved on to Tasnád. It was very bad here, as they neither 
gave us food nor wages. This was a new battalion where young officers did not 
know how much should be remunerated to us as a wage and how much for food, so 
they did not give us anything. We went on to Érdmindszent in Szilágy County 
where we stayed for around four weeks before we moved on to Sülelmed. It was 
already very bad here as we had to work really hard. The commander of the 
company was a very vicious person; the manager at the railway treated us very 
badly. We worked for the railway constructing the rail. It was very hard work 
and we worked an extreme amount. The work to be done was measured in cubic 
metres. We were transferred to Újverbász where it was also very difficult to get 
on. Here we could not even leave the enclosure. Ghettos were being set up and 
the commander of the company did not even allow us to receive letters, so we 
found them torn on the rubbish heap. 2nd Lieutenant Károly Sári, who was the 
commander of the company, received the order from the Ministry of Defence to 
dismiss us since we had done already three years service. This order was also 
read out and freight cars were ordered but they never arrived, I do not know 
why. The Germans had already entered Hungary. The next stop was Tapolca, which 
we left for Marótfalva. The commander of the company remained the same, only he 
became ruder and the food got much worse. The next place was Kolozsvár, where we 
cleared debris. It was followed by Szárhegy, and by Gyergyóbékés, a place close 
to the Romanian border, where we constructed fortifications.

The 8th of September 1944, the frontline was broken through and we withdrew and 
walked for two and half weeks till Mátészalka. We did agricultural work here. 
There was a squad leader who kept shooting at people only because we were Jews. 
This squad leader was called Mohácsi, a fanatic of the Arrow Cross. He kept 
presenting himself as a member of the party of the Arrow Cross. We left this 
place for Budapest. We arrived the 16th of October 1944. When we arrived at the 
station there was an air raid alarm and we ran into different air raid shelters 
and when we wanted to return boys were captured in the street - even when they 
had a soldiers pay-book. They did not touch them but as they had no permit for 
leave, they were escorted to the military headquarters where they could prove 
they had run away only because of the alarm. In Pest we worked for 5 weeks. They 
entrained us the 26th of November 1944 and transported us to Búlcsú. There were 
90 of us in a freight car. We shared two kilos of bread for the whole journey. 
We got water only twice. That was all for 8 days. During this week they did not 
open the cars for ventilation and we could never get off. At the border 
gendarmes handed us over to Germans. When we arrived we got soup from the 
Germans. In Búlcsú we constructed bunkers. The soldiers were awful; they treated 
us in an unsupportable way. They were shooting all the time, a young boy of 
Sopron, a Hitlerjugend volunteered to shoot at us, if he noticed any of us in 
the street he targeted them. Food was scarce: we got 200 grams of bread a day 
and two times some dense soup, but that was not enough now, since we did very 
hard work. As for our accommodation, every morning when we woke up we found snow 
on the covers; that is how much the snow fell in. There was no heating at all, 
and if it happened that someone by chance had a few potatoes and wanted to cook 
them he surely got shot. Once someone wanted to stoop down for a carrot and was 
shot. People died for a piece of potato or for a carrot  for nothing else. 
Where we worked, on the fields there were some turnips that peasants had failed 
to collect. If the boys went to collect them because they were hungry and if the 
privates noticed them they immediately started to shoot at us. It was not even 
possible to wash here.

We set off and left Búlcsú, and when we arrived in the first German village they 
told us that the weak should report as they were going to be carried by cars. 
Many of us reported. Out of them they selected the people they disliked and took 
them back to Búlcsú where they shot them. I know it from boys who got behind. 
Also the evening before we set off they put the feeble, the people who could not 
walk any more, on a car, and shot them, too. There were around 30 of these 
people. Death was usually caused by exhaustion but many comrades were also shot.

We left Búlcsú for Mauthausen. It was very bad here: we had no place to sleep 
and nothing to eat. We got around 100 grams of bread a day, bitter coffee for 
breakfast and turnip soup in the evening. Every day the same  there was no 
change. A lot of cadavers, a lot of shooting. People were starving so much that 
they were forced to eat human flesh. They cut pieces of dead bodies and ate 
them. After a bombing several people died and they cut flesh off their thighs 
and similar places. There were also a huge number of sick people who lived in 
separate barracks but received no medicine at all. In April of 1944, we set off 
towards Gunskirchen. They gave us 300 grams of bread for three days, hence 
people ate spinach, turnips, and snails. If someone ran off the road to the 
fields he or she got shot.

Life in Gunskirchen was like in Mauthausen but only worse, if possible. The 
mortality rate became frightening and if they had not liberated us we would not 
have remained alive for more than a few days. The Americans liberated us and we 
started to have a good life.
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="right_menu">
     <div id="right_menu_content">
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main_hu" href="index.php?showarticle=2031">
        The Holocaust in Hungary
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_1')">
        Perpetrators
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_1">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2011">
          The Gendarmerie
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2012">
          The Police
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2013">
          The Public Administration
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_2')">
        The Gentile Population
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_2">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2014">
          Indifference, Antipathy, Antisemitism
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2015">
          Hungarian Rescuers
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_12')">
        Regions of Destruction
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_12">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2016">
          The Capital: Budapest
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2033">
          A City in the Countryside: Balassagyarmat
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2034">
          A Village: Rákosszentmihály
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_4')">
        Women
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_4">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2017">
          Hungarian Jewish Women in the Kanadakommando
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2018">
          SS Female Overseers in Auschwitz
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2019">
        The First Massacre
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2020">
        Antisemitism
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2021">
        The Jewish Council
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2022">
        Resistance, Zionists
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_9')">
        Death Factory - Auschwitz-Birkenau 1944
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_9">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2023">
          Prisoners' Fate in Auschwitz-Birkenau
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2024">
          SS physicians
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2025">
          What did the Victims know?
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_10')">
        Rescue
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_10">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2026">
          Decent Gendarmes
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2027">
          Policemen
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2028">
          Humane Officials
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2029">
          The Military
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2030">
        Looting
       </a>
      </div>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2032">
       Labour Service
      </a>
      <script>
       toc('menu_12');toc('menu_12');
				if (current!=null) toc(current);
      </script>
     </div>
    </div>
   </div>
   <div id="footer">
   </div>
   <a href="http://degob.hu/index.php" style="text-decoration:none;" title="magyar">
    <div id="switch_banner" title="switch to Hungarian">
     váltás magyarra
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="bphm_banner">
    <a href="http://bphm.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="bphm.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/BPHM_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#1d3c51;font-size:9px;">
      bphm.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <div id="holomo_banner">
    <a href="http://www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/holo_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#5b4b32;font-size:9px;">
      holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <a href="index.php">
    <div id="home">
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="scroller">
    <object align="middle" classid="clsid:d27cdb6e-ae6d-11cf-96b8-444553540000" codebase="http://fpdownload.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=8,0,0,0" height="18" id="scroller" width="927">
     <param name="allowScriptAccess" value="sameDomain"/>
     <param name="movie" value="scroller_en.swf"/>
     <param name="quality" value="high"/>
     <param name="wmode" value="transparent"/>
     <param name="bgcolor" value="#000000"/>
     <embed align="middle" allowscriptaccess="sameDomain" bgcolor="#000000" height="18" name="scroller" pluginspage="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" quality="high" src="scroller_en.swf" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="927" wmode="transparent"/>
    </object>
   </div>
  </div>
  <script src="http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js" type="text/javascript">
  </script>
  <script type="text/javascript">
   _uacct = "UA-316143-2";
urchinTracker();
  </script>
 </body>
</html>
