<html>
 <head>
  <title>
   degob.org
  </title>
  <link href="degob.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
  <script language="JavaScript">
   <!-- Hide the script from old browsers --

	var current;

	function toc(toc_id) {

		toc_element = document.getElementById(toc_id);

		if ((toc_element.style.display=='none')||(toc_element.style.display=='')) {
			toc_element.style.display='block';
		}
		else {
			toc_element.style.display='none';
		}
	}


    // --end hiding here -->
  </script>
 </head>
 <body>
  <div id="wrapper">
   <div id="header">
   </div>
   <div id="main_wrapper">
    <div id="left_menu">
     <div id="left_menu_content">
      <a class="menu_main" href="?extsearch">
       Search
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php">
       Main page
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=203">
       On DEGOB
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2049">
       The Survivor Witnesses
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="?glossary">
       Glossary
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Encylopedia of Camps
      </a>
      <br/>
      <a class="menu_main" href="#">
       Supporters
      </a>
      <br/>
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="content_container">
     <div id="content">
      <div>
       <div style="float:left;display:inline">
        <h1 style="display:inline">
         Protocol Nr. 1160
        </h1>
       </div>
       <a href="?showjk_img=1160" style="text-decoration:none; color:#453c2d; ">
        <span style="vertical-align:middle; cursor:pointer; float:right; font-size:11px; width:126px; height:17px;  background-image:url('http://degob.hu/images/arrow_l.jpg'); background-repeat:no-repeat; color:#453c2d; font-weight:bold;">
         <span style="padding-left:30px;">
          scanned image
         </span>
        </span>
       </a>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both; margin-bottom:25px;">
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
       <div style="background-color:#b19d82; border:1px solid #433a2b; width:265px; margin-left:7px; padding:5px; margin-bottom:20px; float:left;">
        <span class="jk_label">
         Name
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         K. E.
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Gender
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         male
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Fels?veresmart
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Date of birth
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         1926
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Place of residence
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         Budapest
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Occupation
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         baker
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Concentration
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         labour service
        </span>
        <br/>
        <span class="jk_label">
         Camps
        </span>
        :
        <span class="jk_fieldvalue">
         St.Martin, Mauthausen, Günskirchen
        </span>
        <br/>
       </div>
      </div>
      <div style="width:100%;display:block; clear:both;">
      </div>
      <br/>
      <br/>
      The person in question has given us the following information:

The 4th of July, 1944, I was called up for labour service in Fels?hangony, from 
where I was sent to Kecskemét to work at the airport. An officer candidate with 
a high school degree, named Szabó, would beat us, he was ruthless to us and he 
The 4th of July, 1944, I was called up for labour service in Fels?hangony, from 
where I was sent to Kecskemét to work at the airport. An officer candidate with 
a high school degree, named Szabó, would beat us, he was ruthless to us and he 
kept our food portions. I was transferred to Szolnok, where sappers, who made us 
work like beasts, would beat me. Cadet Valló was good to us, tried to alleviate 
this bad situation but could not achieve much.

We left Szolnok the first of October because of Russian approach. We came 
towards Pest but proceeded till Székesfehérvár, where we arrived exactly the 
15th of October. Sergeant Szabó wanted to keep back our food portions but the 
cadet broke into the supply office and got some good food cooked for us.

I escaped and came back to Pest. Still before I arrived I learnt that Szálasi 
had taken power. I jumped on a military vehicle and went on travelling on that. 
We lived in Kazár Street No. 9, where the janitor fiercely supported the Arrow 
Cross and the gate was already locked. The Christian baker Vilmos Faragó of the 
house (he was also the manager of the house) had been keeping my older brother 
hidden in his flat already for two weeks. I also went into his place, it was on 
Monday, and he gave me asylum till Friday when they came to collect Jews. He 
wanted to go on keeping us in hiding but was denounced by the wife of the 
janitor János Kultáts.

The Arrow Cross took me to Ferihegy, later I went to work to Pécel, Albertfalva, 
and Rákoskeresztúr. After a while I got hold of a Swiss Schutzpass and entered a 
protected house in Hollán Street. Two days later, privates took us to Garrsion 
Albrecht and from there to Kápolnásnyék. When Russians got closer they took us 
back to the railway station of Józsefváros, where they put us on freight cars. 
We travelled ten days till we got to Fels?galla where my older brother and me 
jumped off the moving train and reported at a meat processing plant as Jewish 
labour servicemen. We worked there for around four weeks. Later, we baked bread 
for the supply unit (my brother was a baker, too).

They took us into Sopron and handed us over to Hungarian soldiers. During the 
trip we were terribly thirsty, in Sopron I wanted to enter some buildings to 
drink water but people refused to give me water. We stayed in Sopron for 8 days, 
when Germans took charge of us and transported us into St. Martin.

In St. Martin peasants were very good to us. They gave us a lot to eat. There 
was a black woman who waited for us every morning at the workplace with bread, 
fried potatoes, cakes, and apple. When we left she gave us a sack of apples and 
bread.

We had to leave for Mauthausen on foot. Hungarian  that is ethnic German - SS 
escorted us. They would shoot the people who could not walk, who were out of 
step, or who entered a house. There was no other form of punishment but death.

We stayed in Mauthausen for three weeks, where we had nothing to do. We just sat 
all day long in the barracks. We had to enter the gate in groups of five. They 
counted us and beat on our backs with a club as we passed by. On the way to 
Mauthausen we met one of our brothers who was also heading towards Mauthausen in 
his company. He was shot in Mauthausen, because he could not walk and sat down 
on a bench. He was 38 years old.

They gave us turnip soup and some mouldy bread. We were starving a lot and if 
someone collected a little nettle or something similar he or she was not allowed 
to cook it.

We slept in the open as there was no room in the tents and we were rained on. 
Every day there was a new pile of dead bodies. People passed away because of 
beating, hunger, and exhaustion.

Every 10-20 metres there was an SS guard. If we had an argument between us (and 
our terrible state made us rather irritable) the SS decided who was right with a 
bullet. But you did need to argue to make them shoot around. They would shoot 
amongst us just for pleasure. It happened more than once that we were sitting 
calm and quiet when suddenly a few bullets flew towards us. Once, a bullet like 
this hit a comrade. He lay there motionless for two days without any treatment 
before he died.

We had to move on towards Günskirchen on foot. The travel lasted for 5-6 days, 
for three days we got no food. The SS would not beat us any more: for any motive 
they would kill. They shot if someone was not able to walk, or was just a little 
bit staggering, or stooped down for some nettles and was little bit out of line, 
or if they simply did not like his or her face.

In a barrack in Günskirchen 3,000 people were accommodated, if one can call it 
accommodation as there were places only for 800 people. We tried to sleep 
leaning to each other; naturally, no one hoped to have a proper sleep. We had 
fights because of exhaustion, we trod on dead bodies without noticing it, or 
rather without caring too much about it. Many went mad and even more people 
died. Around 200-250 people died a day.

Later, the SS would not shoot any more but gave a blow on the head with a club 
and would beat you till you died by their hands.

Hygienic conditions were tragic. There was a single latrine for 17,000 people 
with 7 places. There were of course continuously long queues in front of them. 
Almost everyone had diarrhoea because of the terrible food we had; as a result, 
people were often unable to wait for their turn. If these people left to find a 
place or stood below a tree they were shot.

Americans entered the camp the 4th of May. The SS captain was waiting outside 
with a white flag. We broke in the store and drank and ate. Right away I went to 
the street together with my brother and a friend of mine. We jumped on an 
American car and went into Wells.

In Wells Americans forced local population to put us up, to prepare us a bath 
and to give us food. They grudged but obeyed.

We came home with American support.
     </div>
    </div>
    <div id="right_menu">
     <div id="right_menu_content">
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main_hu" href="index.php?showarticle=2031">
        The Holocaust in Hungary
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_1')">
        Perpetrators
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_1">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2011">
          The Gendarmerie
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2012">
          The Police
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2013">
          The Public Administration
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_2')">
        The Gentile Population
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_2">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2014">
          Indifference, Antipathy, Antisemitism
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2015">
          Hungarian Rescuers
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_12')">
        Regions of Destruction
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_12">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2016">
          The Capital: Budapest
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2033">
          A City in the Countryside: Balassagyarmat
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2034">
          A Village: Rákosszentmihály
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_4')">
        Women
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_4">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2017">
          Hungarian Jewish Women in the Kanadakommando
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2018">
          SS Female Overseers in Auschwitz
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2019">
        The First Massacre
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2020">
        Antisemitism
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2021">
        The Jewish Council
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2022">
        Resistance, Zionists
       </a>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_9')">
        Death Factory - Auschwitz-Birkenau 1944
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_9">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2023">
          Prisoners' Fate in Auschwitz-Birkenau
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2024">
          SS physicians
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2025">
          What did the Victims know?
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="#" onclick="toc('menu_10')">
        Rescue
       </a>
       <ul id="menu_10">
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2026">
          Decent Gendarmes
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2027">
          Policemen
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2028">
          Humane Officials
         </a>
        </li>
        <li>
         <a class="menu" href="index.php?showarticle=2029">
          The Military
         </a>
        </li>
       </ul>
      </div>
      <div class="hhr">
       <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2030">
        Looting
       </a>
      </div>
      <a class="menu_main" href="index.php?showarticle=2032">
       Labour Service
      </a>
      <script>
       toc('menu_12');toc('menu_12');
				if (current!=null) toc(current);
      </script>
     </div>
    </div>
   </div>
   <div id="footer">
   </div>
   <a href="http://degob.hu/index.php" style="text-decoration:none;" title="magyar">
    <div id="switch_banner" title="switch to Hungarian">
     váltás magyarra
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="bphm_banner">
    <a href="http://bphm.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="bphm.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/BPHM_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#1d3c51;font-size:9px;">
      bphm.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <div id="holomo_banner">
    <a href="http://www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu" style="text-decoration:none;" target="_blank" title="www.holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu">
     <img src="http://degob.hu/images/holo_ikon.jpg"/>
     <br/>
     <span style="text-align:center; text-decoration:none; color:#5b4b32;font-size:9px;">
      holokausztmagyarorszagon.hu
     </span>
    </a>
   </div>
   <a href="index.php">
    <div id="home">
    </div>
   </a>
   <div id="scroller">
    <object align="middle" classid="clsid:d27cdb6e-ae6d-11cf-96b8-444553540000" codebase="http://fpdownload.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=8,0,0,0" height="18" id="scroller" width="927">
     <param name="allowScriptAccess" value="sameDomain"/>
     <param name="movie" value="scroller_en.swf"/>
     <param name="quality" value="high"/>
     <param name="wmode" value="transparent"/>
     <param name="bgcolor" value="#000000"/>
     <embed align="middle" allowscriptaccess="sameDomain" bgcolor="#000000" height="18" name="scroller" pluginspage="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" quality="high" src="scroller_en.swf" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" width="927" wmode="transparent"/>
    </object>
   </div>
  </div>
  <script src="http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js" type="text/javascript">
  </script>
  <script type="text/javascript">
   _uacct = "UA-316143-2";
urchinTracker();
  </script>
 </body>
</html>
