The persons in question have given us the following information:

Ilona Klein relates the following: We lived in Kispest, where my 
parents had a leather goods shop. My three elder sisters worked in 
my fathers shop, my elder brother was in hiding in Budapest with 
Christian documents, and I attended school.

In the summer of 1944, my three elder sisters were drafted for 
labour service because they were summoned. They were on service in 
Csepel, from where they were deported to Germany. My parents and 
me were taken to the brick factory of Monor, from where we were 
transported to Auschwitz.

At selection, they separated me form my parents, took me into the 
baths, where they cut my hair off, gave me new clothes and led me 
to Camp C, block 25, where I met my elder sisters who had been 
deported here earlier.

From the beginning of August till November, all four of us went to 
work in the weaving mill. We spun fuses out of rags and of tarred 
womens hair. They also brought clothes to the weaving mill from 
the crematoria. We tore them up and used them for the same 
purpose. Who prepared daily ### ### received a 1 Mark bonus after 
each 30 metres. We gave the money to the Polish female Capo, who 
gave in return a voucher, which we gave to the Lagerälteste, who 
gave us bread, honey and margarine for it, which were stolen from 
our provisions.

In November, we went into the Aussenkommando. We did 15 kilometres 
a day on foot walking to the bank of the Vistula to work. At 5 
oclock at dawn we lined up for roll call and left for work at 7 
am, and worked till 2 pm. We worked with pickaxes, cars, doing 
very hard male work. Four girls had to fill the car with soil, and 
we pushed it up on the hill where we spread it with shovels. My 
elder sister Erzsis foot became frozen so she stopped working. As 
a result she got such a hard beating that she needed to be 
operated on in five places, and their traces can still be seen. At 
7 am, when we left for work Grese checked our march. We had to 
pass the lines of SS soldiers and their dogs, and if someone was 
out of step she would give her a kick. Once she gave such a hard 
kick to me that I became covered with blood. I suffered a lot from 
the cold; my hands got swollen and wounded but they did not let me 
stay home. The people who went out to work got Zulag and half a 
kilo of bread twice a week. We received the lunch when we got home 
after 2 pm. Our hands were so numb because of the cold that we 
could not properly eat.

The 1st of January 1945, we left Auschwitz for Bergen-Belsen. There 
were 1,300 of us on the train. They put 90 people in a freight 
car. We got bread and margarine for the journey. The other 
transports left Auschwitz only two weeks later.

The 1,300 of us got into a block in Bergen-Belsen. On the first 
day we got neither food nor covers, while the straw we had was 
taken away. The following day, ten of us could share a loaf of 
bread. A few days later they led us to the disinfecting room at 
night. We were already asleep when they woke us up at midnight and 
told us that we were going to have a bath. At 3 am we were still 
standing in the yard; we had short hair, no caps or shawls, wore 
sandals with wooden soles, and ragged clothes. When we started 
walking an SS-man gave us blows with a thick club to hurry us. I 
fell and the others trod on me. If they noticed a cap on one of us 
they would seize it. It was snowing heavily as we were walking 
towards the baths. They led us into a cold hall, opened the other 
door, and we undressed and passed naked in front of lines of the 
SS. One of the Polish female Capo commented that these are from 
Budapest and they had a short laugh at it with an SS man. There 
was a Slovakian girl called Olga, who had been block leader in 
block no. 5 of the Czech camp in Auschwitz, and now she was work 
leader in Bergen-Belsen. She would beat us hard.

My sister Erzsi got into the infirmary, where a French doctor 
operated on her. She had great pains and suffered a lot. Three or 
four of them lay in the same bed; they were swarming with lice, 
while her wounds were only rarely bandaged. They lay there dirty, 
full of lice, and no one care about them.

The English liberated us the 15th of April 1945.
 
After liberation they carried us away from the death camp and 
lodged us in military barracks in Bergen.

The 1st of October, seeing that they would not organise our travel 
home, we started off individually. We travelled for 16 days, and 
arrived in Budapest yesterday, the 16th of October.

When we arrived we went to Kispest to see our home. Our flat had 
been bombed, and not even an item of our clothes has remained. Our 
parents have remained in Auschwitz, our brother who was in hiding 
with Christian documents has survived.