The person in question has given us the following information:

On the 20th of March 1944, a day after the Germans invaded the country I wanted 
to send a pack to my husband who was in labour service with one of his comrades, 
who spent his days off at home and was travelling back the same day. I asked a 
policeman whether I could enter the building of the railway station. He politely 
responded Just come in, and he right away put me in the line of other captured 
Jews. In the evening they took me to Kistarcsa, and the 29th of April to 
Auschwitz.

The first weeks in Kistarcsa were awful. 10-12 people lay on a straw mattress 
without any cover or provision. The only food we got was sent to us by the 
Hungarian National Jewish Aid Action. There was a policeman called Bakos, who 
was infinitely cruel to us. He destroyed us mentally. He kept telling us that 
You would not go home from here any more.

It appeared that he was going to be right because we had to leave for Auschwitz 
the 28th of April. There were 78 people in the freight car: 50 women and 28 men. 
We arrived after a day of travel. On arrival, they asked us at the station 
whether someone was sick or unable to walk. Naturally, many volunteered. They 
were sent directly to the gas chamber. In those days the train stopped far away, 
and later we  - the first Hungarian transport  built the rail on which the 
train could come closer. For three weeks we stayed in a so-called quarantine 
before I got into the so-called Kanadakommando together with 150 others.

The Kanadakommando used to open the luggage and sort out the clothes of the 
deported. We received better treatment, and wore the same striped clothes and 
red headscarves. I spent here around four months. We worked with the clothes of 
dead people. We found documents and photos in their pockets. Mentally, this work 
destroyed us completely. It was horrible to see the chimneys throwing out fire 
everyday, and to see the pits on fire from afar. Dead bodies were so numerous 
that the crematoria did not have the capacities to burn them all so they burnt 
people also in pits out in the open.

There were transports that arrived during the night and were sent to the gas 
chamber without selections. There were nights when they burnt 25,000 people.

People from the last Hungarian transport came from Újpest and the neighbourhoods 
of Pest. A few weeks later there was less work to do because no new transports 
arrived so the Kanadakommando was dismissed. My last horrible memory working in 
the Kanada is the episode when men, who had worked in the gas chambers, were 
brought to our place and gassed in the room where the Kanada used to gas 
clothes.

For four weeks I was in quarantine from where I got into an Aussenkommando. On 
the third day an SS-man beat me almost to death with no apparent reason only 
because he was drunk. He was treading on me, kicking me, and he broke three of 
my ribs. The German head doctor of the hospital prepared a report (so-called 
Meldung) about it, since it was too much even for him. I stayed in hospital for 
8 days, and I could stay another week in the block for the convalescent.

Later, I was transferred into the commando of the weaving mill. This was the 
most horrible. If we did not weave the expected quantity they would beat us. The 
road to the workplace led through totally muddy parts and we crossed them 
without shoes and warm clothes.

At the end of October, also the commando of the weaving mill was moved into Camp 
C. This was even more horrible because the rain fell into the block. We stood 
there lined up for roll call in the freezing cold and we had to work afterwards. 
It also happened that they were disinfecting us all the night and we could not 
sleep at all but we had to go to work all the same. 

At the same time the kitchen moved and it meant that we did not get a bite of 
food from Sunday noon till Wednesday evening. They said it was a punishment but 
we never found out for what.

When they wanted to make Aryan people work in the weaving mill the Jews were 
dismissed and I was selected for a transport the 29th of November.

They took me to St. Gheorgenthal, where I worked for an aircraft parts plant. In 
the beginning there were only 200 people working there guarded by 10 
Aufseherins. These Aufseherins were quite nice when compared to those in 
Auschwitz. When Russians approached us they brought here prisoners from various 
camps, and also the SS came with them. This meant that life became hell also 
here. They would keep beating us. We dug trenches, and they forced us to get 
prepared to counter the enemy. On the 20th of December, I fell sick with 
pneumonia and typhus that had an effect later also on my legs.

The 9th of May, the Russians liberated us. I spent another two weeks in hospital 
before I came home.