The persons in question have given us the following information:

The ghetto in Pestszenterzsébet did not consist of a certain street or of a 
certain area of the town but of some groups of houses in different points of the 
city. Most often they tried to allocate us the houses that underwent the 
greatest damages during the bombings of June. But we did not care about it since 
it was summer and we did not miss the glass of the window or the roof. We could 
freely walk in town, we only had to return home by 6 pm. We believed we could 
stay here until the end of the war. In the evening of the 29th of June, suddenly 
gendarmes cordoned off the houses. No one could leave or enter them any more. 
The 1st of July, they herded us to the railway station and entrained us. Before 
it happened, gendarmes searched women and men in the most brutal way. They 
brought here the 78-82-years-old helpless elderly from the rest home. They 
grabbed the wheelchair of an engineer who had been paralysed during the last war 
and could move only in the chair, and shoved it into the freight car. They 
called the military doctor to help a labouring woman but he failed to come. She 
was thrown into the freight car as well and had to give birth among 80 people, 
where there was hardly enough room to stand on one leg.

We stood in the open in the brick factory of Monor. Once, we had a downpour and 
it was awful later to lie there soaking wet and on muddy clay in water up to the 
knees. Gendarmes and German soldiers guarded the brick factory. We had the food 
we had taken from home. Meanwhile, Zionists singled out a populous family and 
Germans let them leave. 

Transports left this place on the 6th, 7th and 8th of July. We left on the 8th 
with the last transport. At the entrainment, gendarmes beat us. We travelled for 
four days in a stuffy car without water. At Kassa they opened the freight car 
and robbed us.

In Auschwitz we were separated from our families. In the baths they took away 
everything we had, shaved us and dressed us in prisoners clothes. Two months 
later, Hungarian transports of labourers arrived and we managed to talk with 
them. We asked them where the elderly stayed and they told us that there were 
seven crematoria and gas chambers in this place. Now, we understood why there 
was so much smoke all the time and why we could see flames during the night. We 
were very often cold here. We had to stand lined up for roll calls basically 
naked, only in thin shirts day after day. At noon we had to line up for a bad 
soup, which contained grass, pebbles and sand, but no grease or salt. In the 
afternoon there was another roll call that lasted till 4 or 5 pm. If someone was 
unable to go on standing and sat down on the floor and later the Aufseherin 
noticed that there was a little earth on her garment she was lashed with a whip. 
Selections were frequent and always gave us a horrible amount of stress. One 
day, there was a severe block curfew when not even block leaders were allowed to 
go out. By chance, we got close to the windows and saw that armed SS-men were 
walking up and down between the blocks and no one could go out. We heard people 
screaming and wailing, and saw that they were throwing naked girls up on a big 
truck while they were shouting Help!, Save us!. The truck returned every ten 
minutes. During the time we watched it the truck may have carried away as many 
as 3,000 women, who were allegedly from Camp "C" and B3." When the block leader 
noticed that we were watching in secret she ordered us to leave the windows and 
told us that we were going to end up where the others were taken. We got 
terribly frightened, and started crying and sobbing. We had a terrible day. 
Later, we got selected for a transport of labourers. We had another bath, and 
received proper clothes; they gave us also coats and now we could even wear 
stockings.

We went to Altenburg, which was a large camp for labourers. There were men and 
women together. We worked for the ammunition plant Hasag-Altenburg. It was a 
very hard job. We had to lift 40-50 kilos heavy boxes and place them into the 
machine. Many of us gave up. We worked 12 hours a day, one week during the day, 
the other week during the night. I had an accident (Gottfried Livia). A hot 
splinter of iron fell in one of my eyes and I almost went blind. I had horrible 
pain. I could not work for two weeks but later I completely recovered. We were 
starving awfully. We fished the half-rotten turnips and cabbage leaves from the 
rubbish heap that was produced by the kitchen. If they caught us at it they 
would cut our hair off as a punishment. You got the same punishment if they 
caught you talking with a man, while men were lashed for the same reason. Very 
many of us died here: they starved to death or got tuberculosis. There were also 
50 Hungarian men here. Once, men received packs from the Red Cross and gave us 
also a small part of it. We also hoped to receive packs but Germans had stolen 
ours. We got a few Marks bonus in the factory. We saved them and also sold our 
margarine portions for weeks, and bought shoes on the money, which cost around 
17-18 Reichsmarks. The Red Cross gave them these shoes for free but we had to 
sacrifice much to obtain them, as we were unable to walk in wooden shoes. We did 
not have stockings either. Numerous people got nephritis and ovaritis. At the 
beginning, we could regularly wash but later the camp had an air raid and we got 
no more water. We started getting lice.

When the frontline was at Leipzig, we had to start marching in the afternoon 
without a bite of bread. When it happened we had already not been given any food 
for 48 hours. We went on marching all the night. The next morning we had a rest. 
Meanwhile, many of us escaped. They went on chasing us and we arrived close to 
Waldenburg, where seven of us could share a kilo and a half of bread but nothing 
else. American panzers were already bombing the town so it started to be pretty 
urgent for them and they had no time to finish distributing the bread. They 
wanted to execute us but they did not have time for that either so they led us 
up on a hill opposite the town. They once again wanted to execute us here but we 
hid. At dawn the two of us walked down off the hill. Americans had already 
invaded the town. On the way bullets were flying close to us but it did not 
occur to us that we should be scared. We were in terrible condition; they even 
took a photo of us. They gave us all the good things so that we could perk up a 
little.