The person in question has given us the following information:

There were ca. 8,000 Jewish families in Huszt, mostly craftsmen and tradesmen, 
usually living in good financial conditions.

The first anti-Jewish measure was the confiscation of property, around the 20th 
of April, last year, decree issued by the first notary (called József Bíró) and 
the sub-prefect. Then came the order to wear yellow stars and finally the 
ghetto.

The Jewish Council could not change these decrees, but they managed to have some 
bread sent to our workplaces.

I do not clearly remember the members of the Council, only three names: Herman 
Rosenbaum, N. Dunkel and Markovics, the mill-owner. The members of the Council 
tried to do everything they could to help us, but unfortunately they did not 
manage much.

At THE beginning of April, last year, the ghetto decree was issued, which was 
implemented by the first notary and the gendarme captain as it was set by a 
decree of the Gestapo. The ghetto was in Huszt, in Réty Street. The gendarmes 
appeared in my flat early in the morning with cars, we had to get on these cars 
within an hour, each of us could take a package of 50 kilograms and food. 
Gendarmes and Jewish supplementary gendarmes surrounded the ghetto. 
Accommodation was impossible; we did not even have room to stand properly. 
Everybody from the region was concentrated into Huszt: ca. 20,000 Jews lived in 
the ghetto. Catering was managed in a way that we received raw ingredients for 
soup every day, and each family cooked for themselves.

Women did not have to work, but they drove men with whips to transport 
ammunition. The work was very hard, because we had to carry 200-kilogram iron 
boxes. Many tried to escape, but only 6 managed; however, as I heard later, even 
these people were caught. I remember two friends of mine (called Ebert and 
Lefkovics), who suffered serious internal injuries because of the heavy work. 
They were operated on in Warsaw, but they died soon after arriving in Birkenau.

The deportation order was carried out by the gendarmerie. We could take clothes 
and food with us. We started out around the 1st of May. They crammed 80 people 
in a freight car, so that we did not even have enough room to sit down on our 
packs. We suffered terribly from thirst, because we got no water and there was 
no toilet, either. Although we took food with us, we hardly dared to eat it, 
because we thought that there would be no food for us in Germany.

Before the freight car departed, gendarmes kept trying to rob us. They picked 
and blindfolded one of us and this person had to shout out loud that people 
should hand over all their valuables, otherwise he would be shot. If there were 
no valuables in a freight car, the person was simply shot by the gendarmes. I 
remember the name of a person like that: he was called Jakab Smilovics.

The Hungarian gendarmerie escorted the train until Kassa. In Kassa German 
soldiers appeared and took over the cars and we travelled on in their escort. 
Nobody knew where we were taken. Nobody tried to escape, as there was no way.

The train rattled on with us on it for 3 days and 3 nights until we arrived in 
Birkenau, around the 5th of May, last year. At the station, we marched in front 
of a line of SS soldiers with bayonets. We had to line up in fives, and boys 
under 16 were invited to step out of line. They said these boys would get bread 
and milk. Their fathers joined these children. All of them were taken to the 
right side. What happened to them I do not know, but the fact is that no one 
ever saw them again after that day. We were sent to the left side, that is, to 
the group of workers. These were all younger generations, approximately 30-40-
year-old people.

We were then taken to a huge bath, where we stood naked for hours, our hair was 
cut off, and after the bath we received striped clothes and underwear. 
Approximately 1,000 people were crammed into a block, where we had our 
accommodation, 10-12 people lay on a bunk. It was impossible to sleep here, it 
was not only the great noise and heat but we had such little room that if 
someone wanted to turn on the bunk, everybody else had to turn, too.

The next morning each of us was interrogated as to what our job had been. 
Construction workers were taken to Warsaw, that is how I myself got to Warsaw a 
week later, there were ca. 2,000 of us like me. In Warsaw, accommodation and 
provisions were somewhat better than in Birkenau. We mostly cleared up debris. 
Discipline was strict, because German SS soldiers and the so-called capos 
(work-leaders) were beating us very hard during work. If someone rested a little 
during work, they were beaten up very hard. Here the weaker ones were taken to 
the hospital, but in Mittelgarst there were frequent selections, and the weak 
ones were taken away with a transport, but no one knew where to.

We were in Warsaw for about 3 months before we left for Dachau on foot. We were 
here for a few days only, and went on to Mühldorf by train, ca. 70 of us in a 
freight car.

In Mühldorf I worked as a construction worker, treatment was not bad in the 
beginning, only later. Unfortunately, many people died from typhus.

From Mühldorf, I got to Mitelgarst. It was a ca. 20-kilometre-long journey. Here 
I also worked on a construction site, and treatment was the worst possible. We 
did not live in blocks but in tent-like structures, ca. 16 of us, together with 
the Aryans. Around the 25th of April, this year, there was a sudden antreten, 
that is, a roll call of our workplace, we had to line up in fives. Whoever had 
more or less acceptable striped clothes was given shabby ones, and our shoes 
were also replaced. We had to start going back to Mühldorf on foot, where we 
spent one night, and next day we were entrained. Nobody knew where we were being 
taken. We were travelling up and down in a freight car for two days, they 
obviously did not know what to do with us. American troops thought the cars 
belonged to the German army and they were shooting at us. 2 people died in the 
freight car where I was. As I found out later, there were more than 300 
casualties in these attacks. When we saw that they were shooting at us ever 
harder, we put out some of our striped prison clothes, and then finally they 
stopped. At a small station we realised that the German soldiers left us and we 
simply got off. Then we found out that the war was over. The German police, 
however, drove us back from the village into the freight cars and kept us there.

Shortly afterwards the glorious American troops appeared, who took over us after 
and arrested the German policemen.