The person in question has given us the following information:

The 5th of October, 1942, I was summoned to Bereck, to join the 13th battalion of 
labour servicemen. During the two and a half years I spent in this battalion I 
did not meet 3 decent persons. And these nice people were Romanians.

The privates in our battalion were Székelys. We spent 7 months in Bereck being 
constantly beaten.

Later, we built the defensive line of Háromszék County working under the 
headquarters of Fortress Group no. 3 headed by Captain Makkay and Lieutenant 
Tamás. Several people were trussed up on the orders of Makkay and Tamás. From 
here we returned to Bereck, and later to Voloc. I worked in the area under 
relatively good conditions before we got to the frontline as a result of the 
events of March, 1944.
 
They transported us to Stanislau into the supply unit 118. We arrived in 
Stanislau at dawn after several days of travel. They put us up in a school where 
there was a thick layer of dung on the floor. We worked till midnight in a pace 
that was even faster than the what we performed during deportation in Germany. 
It was thanks to malevolent privates, to Captain Dezs? Nemes Nagy (a landowner 
close to Debrecen) and to Lieutenant Szalay (a tax collector of Újpest, or from 
another place close to Pest), who encouraged the privates saying: "Why do you 
keep the clubs in the hand if not to beat Jews with them!" They personally 
excelled in beating us to show good example to privates.

As Russians got closer this situation turned somewhat better. We withdrew to 
Máramarossziget. During the 12 days long trip 15 comrades were shot partly 
because they fell behind, partly because frustrated privates picked them as 
victims by chance. Among others they killed György Grünwald from the Upper 
Province, András Bolgár and Tibor Rossenberger from Budapest. Assassins were the 
privates: Károly T?kés, Zsigmond Papp, Pál Nagy, and Péter Vörös - soldiers of 
Háromszék County. Their exact addresses can be learnt from Lance Sergeant Miklós 
Kálmán from Marosvásárhely  who was the scribe of the company. The person who 
was eventually responsible for these murders, and who incited the privates, was 
the commander of the company Antal Haszonits, a teacher from Gyöngyös.

When Máramarossziget was evacuated we moved to Szerencs and to the area, where 
locals were very nice to us. Anyone of us could get food for pennies.

Working servicemen were later gathered in Kassa. As a farewell, gendarmes, the 
privates and the commander of the company robbed us. They seized the kitchen, 
the workshop and the stuff that needed to be repaired in the workshop, like 
boots, etc.

In Kassa we spent 10 days in a camp where we got no food but could go in town 
and buy all what we needed as we had money because we had received our wage 
retroactively.

Locals of Kassa were very good to us. They did not only consol us but also 
advised us to stay, and offered to hide us. Only around 5-10 people dared to 
risk it.

80 of us were put into a locked freight car and we travelled for 12 days 
basically without any food. We got 400 grams of bread and 3-4 times some soup.

We arrived in Hidegség. Numbers relevantly reflect the conditions here: out of 
1700 people who arrived here only 400 departed in the direction of German 
internment camps. Death was caused by typhus and murder. They beat us all the 
time; I still have the sign of a blow on the forehead that was made with the 
butt. I could not even wash the wound for a week it was so horrid.

Once they collected those who had typhus and the sick, altogether around 400 
people. They claimed to take them into a warm place, to a hospital but in fact 
transported them to Ilona manor, where they partly died of hunger, partly were 
shot.
Also the cantor of Újpest Tivadar Grünberger passed away here.

Our next stop was Mauthausen. We proceeded partly on foot, partly by train. 
During our walk, in an Austrian village with narrow, crisscross streets SS men 
received us and chased the 6,000 of us through the village. They beat us and if 
someone fell the others trod him to death, or the SS shot him.

Later, they crammed 280 of us into a carriage of an express train. We could not 
even stand, let alone sleep. Provisions simply did not exist. 
 
In Mauthausen I lived relatively well as I registered in two companies, hence, I 
received rations in two places.

In the middle of April, they took us into Günskirchen. On the way they shot 
around 500 of our comrades, because they had no more energy to walk.

Günskirchen was an unfinished camp. In a barrack for 700 people they put up 2400 
of us. We could neither sit nor stand, while millions of lice covered the place. 
The worst thing was that we could not wash ourselves or drink water at all.

Americans liberated us the 4th of May. If Americans had arrived a few days later 
they would not have found alive as many as 2,000 people out of 15,000.