The person in question has given us the following information:

The 23rd of October I had to appear on the grounds of National 
Centre for High School Sports Clubs. From here the Arrow Cross 
took me to Őrszentmiklós, where we dug trenches for two weeks 
before they made us start walking towards Hegyeshalom, where we 
arrived after 10 days of walking. Here, they handed us over to the 
Germans, who entrained us and we arrived in Dachau after a week of 
travel.

We spent only a week in Dachau before we moved on towards 
Ravensbrück.

On arrival we had to undress and they seized everything we had. We 
lived in tents. Rations were horrible just like the treatment. 12 
days later, they selected the strong and carried me with a 
transport of 650 people to Spandau.

We worked here for an ammunition plant. We could hardly endure the 
work. Working hours lasted twelve hours a day, and there were day 
and night shifts. When we arrived home from work deadly tired, 
they kept torturing us with a roll call for another two hours. It 
happened also that we were forced to turn out for roll call from 
our beds during the night. SS-women were playing cruel games and 
ordered their dogs to attack us. 

When the Allies endangered the camp too much, we were evacuated. 
We left in three groups: they put the sick and the weak on cars 
and, as far as I know, carried them to the gas chamber, just like 
the other group that was made up of healthy people. These people 
had to undress before departure; they said: you would not need 
these things anyhow. In the third group there were 150 of us. 
They did not even secure minimal supplies for the journey. We were 
already in horrible condition, when at the end of April close to 
Bahnshof Russian and American troops, who had previously met 
there, liberated us.