The person in question has given us the following information:

We lived in Körösmező. We had a grocery and we also traded with wood, so we 
counted as well-off people. When Germans invaded the country in March 1944, they 
seized everything we had. In April, they proclaimed that Jews had to wear yellow 
stars as marks of differentiation. If someone did not know when exactly the star 
had to be sewed on, they got a terrible beating. The day after Easter, 5 oclock 
at dawn they entered our flats and took us into the ghetto of Mátészalka. We 
stayed there for 6 weeks before they deported us to Auschwitz.

At the railway station of Auschwitz there were twenty of us relatives. I went 
with elderly people while my 14-year-old daughter went to the side where the 
young were staying. An SS asked me how old I was. I told him, and he said I 
should go among the young. I was happy to be at the side of my only daughter and 
we did not need to stay apart, but unfortunately, I could not enjoy this great 
happiness for long, because during an air raid my daughter was shot in the belly 
and died in my arms.

I stayed for 6 weeks with my daughter in Camp C, block 14. We were starving so 
much that it happened that my daughter fainted from hunger, and I could not give 
her anything to eat. We stood for hours during roll calls. Our lives were a 
misery there.

At the end of July, they transported us to Gelsenberg, where we did the hard 
work of bricklayers, but I worked happily with my daughter because we were glad 
we could stay together. Rations were also meagre. 24 of us ate lunch from the 
same pot. It was either beetroot or turnip soup accompanied with a few decagrams 
of bread. We got lunch in our workplace and starved a lot. SS women would beat 
us; they were worse than men. If our beds did not form a perfect line we would 
get a beating. They kept shouting at us. At work they chased us like beasts. The 
worst thing was to watch how my fourteen-year-old daughter starved and suffered.

One day in October, we returned from work and we hardly spent a minute in the 
camp when we had a horrible air raid. The SS ran into bunkers, and told us not 
to leave the block. There was a patrol factory next to our camp and we saw that 
it was completely on fire. People started to run out of the blocks and that was 
when we had the air attack. Airplanes flew very close to the ground. My daughter 
was wounded in the belly, and her intestines poured out from her abdomen. She 
passed away in my arms. I got wounded in # places. One can still see their 
marks. We remained in the block after 2 pm but they took us in hospital during 
the night, where they treated us for 8 days. Doctors were very good to us, and 
nurses cured us also with much love.

I was in hospital when the Americans liberated us the 21st of April 1945. 
Americans gave us a lot of chocolate, meat and everything good.

I returned home with a Czech-Slovakian transport. Now, I am here on my own; 
everyone left me; I have received the news that my husband, who was called up 
three years ago and went to Ukraine, died; I lost also my daughter; I am full of 
despair about my situation. I can see only one goal: to get to Palestine and 
forget about everything, about all the suffering that I had to go through, and 
start a new life.