The person in question has given us the following information:

We were entrained from the Beregszász ghetto and travelled for 3 days and nights 
until we arrived in Auschwitz, crammed together with 80-100 people in a closed 
freight car where one could not even move.
Selections, bathing, haircut and sorting out to blocks followed, things that 
have been already often detailed.
I worked in the baths Brezsinka  where we sorted out clothes. The work was not 
hard, but mentally we suffered terribly because the bath was opposite the 
crematorium and we had to witness horrible things. I worked in night shifts. 
Last year, I saw it with my own eyes that arriving people on Hungarian 
transports were undressed entirely in front of the baths and were given soap and 
a towel in their hands as if they were going to wash themselves. Instead ### 
them into a huge bathroom with mirrors where they opened the gas, and then they 
burnt them. There were not only old people but also countless beautiful, healthy 
young mothers with their children among them. It was horrible to hear them 
crying for help in the dark night. It happened many times that among the clothes 
that we were sorting we found dead bodies. As far as I know, corpses were burnt 
in the crematorium until the end of October 1944, after that Germans gradually 
started to disappear.

I was suffering through this work for 2 full months, and then fortunately I got 
out of the baths and into a kommando working outside. Our job was to axe tough 
soil, which was hard physical work and the SS treated us very severely at work. 
There was no mercy. Even in the heaviest rain we had to work while we starved a 
lot.

3 months later, we were entrained. They selected those who were fit for work and 
took them to Lipstadt, where I worked in an ammunition factory. We worked 12 
hours a day, the treatment was very bad, the SS work leaders would beat us for 
no reason. We could not complain about rations, that is, the food tasted good, 
but they gave us too little. 4 months later, we were moved on to Bergen-Belsen. 
In this camp we were subjected to indescribable suffering. We starved a lot, 
they gave us hardly any food at all. As a result, hundreds of people starved to 
death every day and soon typhus started to spread, so people were dropping like 
flies. Almost all of us were scabby and full of lice because we could not wash 
at all. Sick people were not treated at all because there was no medicine. There 
was filth and dirt everywhere. We suffered for 4 months in Bergen-Belsen, and 
finally one night in the middle of April suddenly our saviours, the glorious 
American troops, arrived and liberated us from our horrible suffering. They made 
sure we had the best supplies and were disinfected, and we rested for 2 more 
weeks in Bergen. We got to Budapest through Bohemia with the help of the 
American troops.

As soon as I can, I would very much like to emigrate to Palestine.