The persons in question have given us the following information:

We got to Birkenau from the brick factory of Munkács with the 
first group. We arrived after 2 days travel. They separated us 
from our families and led us into the baths in the group of women 
fit for work. After the baths we got prisoners clothes and were 
put in blocks. A few days later, we got tattoos and were assigned 
work. All of us were put into the so-called White shawl group. 
Our job was to sort out the clothes taken off by people of the 
transports and to pack them for transportation. We only had to 
pack the delicate and good clothes, and tore the rest into pieces 
to serve as rugs. This work was basically not difficult but the 
conditions under which we worked were awful. The crematorium was 
in front of us, and we could see how they selected each transport 
that arrived, we could see the elderly and children entering the 
gate of the crematorium, we could hear the horrible screams but we 
never saw anyone coming out. We also saw that people were burnt in 
the pits close to the crematorium when the work to do was too much 
for the crematorium because transports were too numerous. Once, 
when we were sorting out clothes we found a drowned baby in one of 
the suitcases. Her mother had hidden the baby there. On the whole, 
it was easy for us because we had great quantities of stolen food 
but no one could eat it hearing all those screams, breathing an 
air that was stinking of burnt human flesh.

Not all of us worked in Brezinka for eight months: three of us got 
into the hospital as nurses (who continue to talk): We often 
witnessed how Dr Mengele selected patients in the hospital. 
Mengele did not do the selections on his own; he had constant 
companions and it appeared that he even had his superiors, SS-
women called Greze (Grese) and Drechsler. These two women were 
even crueller than Mengele. Greze used to be an actress, she was a 
gorgeous, pretty young woman. Mengele was a classic example of the 
Germanic male beauty. Selections happened the following way: 
First, naked women scuffled in front of Mengele with arms raised; 
and then in front of Greze and Drechsler. Mengele did the first 
selections, while the women might select also people who Mengele 
left unselected. Selections did not only regard the crematorium: 
there were also selections of labourers but you could never tell 
what was the objective. It also happened that a group of young 
healthy women that appeared to be a transport of labourers was 
sent into the gas chamber. Block 7 in Camp C was the place where 
selected labourers were gathered. Departing transports of 
labourers but also transports for internal use left from here. The 
population of Camp C totalled 35,000. These people were lodged in 
32 blocks with around 1,200 people in each block. Block 1 and 2 
were empty; block 3 was for people from Pest, from the 
agglomeration of Pest and Pápa (naturally, not only transports 
from Hungary were put up in the following blocks, however the 
girls know only them); block 4 and 5 were bathrooms; block 6 was 
the clothes store; as we have said block 7 was the labourers 
block; block 8 was the childrens block; in block 9 Polish people 
were lodged mostly from Litzmannstadt; block 10 was for Carpatho-
Ruthenians; no. 11 was for Polish; no. 12 was a bathroom; no. 13 
was for Polish, in blocks 14 and 16 labourers for internal uses 
were lodged (yard Kommando and toilet Kommando), no. 15 was a HKB 
(Häftlingkrankenbau, infirmary), block 17 was for mangy people; 
until no. 31 there were living blocks; and finally, block 32 was a 
bathroom.

Dr Mengele appeared in hospital 5-6 times a day to do selections 
and control whether his instructions were respected. Also in the 
blocks, selections  headed by Mengele  were done more than once 
a week.

Probably the most terrible in the life of the entire camp were the 
roll calls repeated twice a day, when 35,000 people had to stand 
erect for hours in scorching sun or pouring rain while they 
finished counting them. If only a person was missing out of 35,000 
(and it often happened that nobody was missing but they counted 
badly) all the people of the camp had to stay on their knees in 
the mud for hours.
After the first baths we got torn, ragged, dirty clothes without 
any underwear. But we could not even have these clothes for a 
longer time because every fortnight (but sometimes every day) they 
disinfected us, and they seized all our clothes, especially the 
proper cloths we had stolen in the meantime, and it depended on 
luck what sort of clothes one got afterwards. In the freezing cold 
of the winter we went to work in a thin garment. No one had 
stockings and only a few had shoes.

After 9 months of stay in Auschwitz, one day, we were selected for 
a transport of labourers, and left for Schlesiensee after 
disinfections. The camp in Schlesiensee was quite all right, 
treatment was not bad and we also got (proper) food. Our job was 
not easy. We dug trenches, and had to work in the open also in 
pouring rain. Later, the camp got worse and worse. We got an 
Oberscharführer who was very cruel; he demanded a lot of work. The 
winter became colder and colder and once we decided to strike, and 
that we would not go on working in flimsy little dresses without 
coats and stockings. Our strike had no results. When the 
Oberscharführer saw we were not working he almost beat a few of us 
to death, so we had to start working.

After a few weeks stay we left for Bergen-Belsen on foot. We did 
35 kilometres a day. During the whole journey that lasted almost 5 
weeks they never bought bread for us, and hardly let us have a 
rest. We spent the nights in great cold in the open. Wherever we 
found turnips or frozen potatoes we jumped on them, while the SS 
escort would shoot in the midst of us. Whoever fell behind for 
whatever reason was shot dead. We arrived in Bergen-Belsen after 5 
weeks of walk. This camp, if possible, was even worst than 
Auschwitz. There was horrible squalor everywhere; people in the 
blocks were full of lice; dead and living bodies stayed in the 
same bed often for days. Every day new meter-high heaps of corpses 
grew in the yard. People fell sick with typhus and because of 
starvation and died one after the other. For 3 weeks we got only 
water but no bread at all. Finally, three weeks later we got 
bread, but it was bread that the SS had poisoned and gave us like 
that. We got it on a Monday, while Germans expected Americans to 
arrive on Saturday; we would have certainly all died by the time. 
However, liberating troops arrived on Tuesday so we survived.