The persons mentioned above have given us the following information:

20 Jewish families lived in Fels?ripnyice, mainly working in agriculture. They 
lived well. My financial state was moderate; my father was an elementary school 
teacher.

In 1939, when Hungarians entered the country, antisemitic measures started to be 
tion:

20 Jewish families lived in Fels?ripnyice, mainly working in agriculture. They 
lived well. My financial state was moderate; my father was an elementary school 
teacher.

In 1939, when Hungarians entered the country, antisemitic measures started to be 
taken. First, they withdrew trade licences. They had this statute realised by 
gendarmes, who applied strict measures. They beat us while the people of the 
village were glad to see it. We could not do anything. The members of the Jewish 
Council were Dr Illés Sternberger and Dr Imre László, who both worked in an 
honest way.

From the 5th of April, 1944, we wore yellow stars, and the 15th of April the 
ghetto was opened. It was the police and the gendarmes who closed us into the 
ghetto. They searched houses and seized food, clothes, money, gold, and 
everything. We were taken into the ghetto escorted by the gendarmes and they 
newly searched our house and took what was left. We could bring quite a great 
quantity of food, a set of clothes and two sets of underwear. I do not know what 
happened to the rest of our belongings. The ghetto was enclosed. The police 
guarded it outside and Jewish security men inside. In Ungvár 30,000 Jews lived 
in the ghetto. Accommodation was poor; we had to build barracks ourselves. Food 
was provided by the Council that remained outside the ghetto and used our own 
stored food supplies. We were terribly desperate. We men went out to work, 
cleaning abandoned Jewish flats. Authorities tried to encourage us, saying that 
the reason why they moved us into the ghetto was that we Jews who lived close to 
the border endangered the state of the country. They would naturally let us free 
after the war. We did not fully believe them.

We tried to escape but actually very few of us ran away. Many died because of 
hygienic deficiencies and from starvation. These were mostly elderly people and 
women. Authorities abused their power in four ghettos, plundering and searching 
and beating up people. They simply claimed someone was a Communist; they took 
him into the office and beat him up so much that he might also die.

The decree for deportation was published by the German command of Ungvár. They 
told us we were going to be taken into the middle of the country to do 
agricultural work and we even believed it. Deportation was carried out by 
Hungarian authorities till Kassa, and it implied new beating, searching and 
other harsh measures. Deported people could bring the food that remained for 
them in the ghetto. They put 90-100 people in a freight car. They did not put 
either water or a bucket for the toilet in the car.

The train departed for Kassa. The cars were opened in Kassa, and later only when 
they reached their destination. Three people died. One of them was shot by the 
SS; the other two died because of exhaustion. During the night gendarmes shot 
through the window. Hungarians escorted the train till Kassa, where we were 
searched again. We already knew that we were being deported into Germany. We did 
not try to escape as it was impossible.

The transport arrived in Birkenau the 28th of May. When we got off, a doctor was 
waiting for the transport and separated us from our parents and brothers and 
sisters younger than 12. I was separated from a younger brother of mine and from 
my mother.

They took us straight into the baths to disinfect us. They cut our hair. The 
first lessons about the concentration camp were given there, also the first 
blows. They seized everything we had and dressed us in striped clothes. They 
gave us no underwear. We got no food after we left the baths, only when we 
departed three days later.

The next stop was Auschwitz. During the 8-kilometre-long march the SS beat us a 
lot and even shot several of us, those who could not run at the same pace.
When we arrived in Auschwitz we had a bath and put on our old clothes. During 
the two days we stayed here we got no food at all. Afterwards, we were 
transported to Monowitz.

It was already better in Monowitz. The food was daily 250 grams of bread, 25 
grams of margarine and soup in the evening. The soup was water mixed with some 
vegetables without salt. The work was difficult and was made even more difficult 
by the surveillance of German Capos. First we did road construction, which was a 
difficult job in itself but was rendered even worse by beating and denunciations 
that were made to the SS command. We were prohibited to talk with civilians, if 
they caught you at it, you were finished. We left for work at 4:30 am and worked 
till 6:30 pm. In between there was an hour of lunch break without lunch when we 
could have a rest.

Our life was darkened by selections that happened every three months, when they 
took away our enfeebled comrades. We did not hear of them later of course. The 
rumour had it that they had been executed in the crematorium of Birkenau. In the 
winter, 25 of us out of 145 died or were frozen.

As for washing, we had a bath once a week and here they already changed our 
clothes: we got new ones every three months.

Also air raid alarms made our lives more difficult and took the lives of other 
comrades. These were the occasions when our friends tried to get hold of some 
bread or some food and were caught at it and hanged.

We stayed in this lager till the 17th of January, 1945, when the Russian attack 
forced us to escape. The food we got for the journey was our daily portion, but 
the journey lasted 15 days. We walked three days without food before they put us 
on 20-ton open freight cars, 120-140 people in each. The surveillance of German 
Capos made the journey harder since they took our better blankets and occupied 
half of the freight car, while the other half was kept for the rest of the 
people. These conditions sentenced three quarters of the transported people to 
death. In Nordhausen there were 12,000 of us and when we arrived they counted 
exactly 4,000. On the way we got food only once, the daily portion. We ate snow 
and nothing else. Some tried to escape but failed and were shot. We crossed 
villages and towns. First, we placed dead bodies into the second wagon emptied 
by the Lagerältester, but as their number grew rapidly, we were ordered to throw 
them out as soon as possible. It happened that the dead were still alive but to 
have more space we already threw him out. This happened on order of the Capos. 
We naturally took off their shoes and clothes before, while the SS soldier took 
their gold teeth if they had them by chance.

After this sad journey we arrived at Nordhausen. They newly disinfected us and 
gave us warm food for the first time in a long while, and later some bread in 
the quantity of the daily portion. After five days of stay they selected us for 
another transport, and we set off to build an underground factory.

When we got to Blankenburg we had to build the camp first. The process of the 
construction work was rigidly controlled. As they wanted the camp to be ready as 
soon as possible we worked in three shifts changing shifts every week. They 
treated us pretty harshly and several of us died. They could not stand the heavy 
underground air and many got pulmonary diseases. After a months stay the daily 
food portion got smaller: now we shared a loaf of bread among ten of us and 
received 3 decilitres of water a day. There were only 400 of us here still from 
the transport, and three months later 380 of us left as the approach of the 
English forced us to escape again. Naturally, we escaped on foot, walking around 
50 kilometres a day. What we could eat during the five-day walk was the daily 
food portion. We got only once bread and warm food.

After five days walk, we got to a barn on a field. We stayed there and did not 
go out for work; in fact it was prohibited to leave the barn. We shared a loaf 
of bread among 15 and even 20 of us and got some warm coffee once or twice in 
three days.

The approach of the English forced us to move on. Naturally, we had to carry on 
scurrying and this led to the death of more comrades again. The weak were put on 
wagons, but they never arrived to the place where we did. After three days walk 
we got to Neustadt where they boarded us onto a ship, claiming that the Swedish 
Red Cross would bring us into Sweden where we could stay also after the war. 
They said we would be freed abroad. However, in the last minutes the ship was 
bombed and out of 7,000 prisoners, 312 survived.

The same day, the 3rd of May, the English liberated us. Out of the 312 people, 
many were injured who received medical care. Later, we all had a good life.

These were my own experiences.

My future plans: I want to emigrate to Palestine.