The person in question has given us the following information:

They entrained us in the brick factory of Munk√°cs and we left for 
Auschwitz. We did not work there at all. We spent the whole day 
being lined up for roll call and staying in queues for food, while 
they beat us without any reason. I spent here four weeks before 
there were selections and the people fit for work (around 1,000 of 
us) were carried to Gelsenkirchen. We travelled in closed cattle 
cars, 50 of us in a car like that; SS soldiers occupied its middle 
part. We got bread and sausage for the journey. We travelled for 
three days till we arrived.
In Gelsenkirchen we cleared rubble, and there were also Kommandos 
that carried bricks, stones and heavy iron pieces. It was quite 
hard physical work that was controlled by the SS. We could have no 
rest or talk with each other during work. SS-women would generally 
beat us. We had to work 12 hours a day in shifts. The daily soup 
had a good taste but was very little. The sick were taken into the 
infirmary, where they were treated.
I stayed here for 2 months before they carried me to Essen by 
tram. We worked there for an ammunition plant guarded strictly by 
SS-women who beat us all the time. The plant was already heavily 
bombed and on one morning, when we wanted to go to work they told 
us that it had been bombed to the ground. Later, they took us only 
to clear the rubble. Once, when we were in the camp there was a 
bombing and bombs fell on the infirmary, severely injuring some 
people and killing one of them. We got bread once a day, 200 
grams, so we starved immensely. In the meantime the waterworks was 
bombed and as a result we could not wash for weeks and everyone 
got lice and mange.
I spent half a year in Essen before I was moved to Bergen-Belsen. 
We lived here in wooden barracks, lay on the floor for four weeks 
without covers. We got a little bread and soup on the first week 
but later nothing. In consequence, we all suffered agonies from 
starvation, and a huge number of people staved to death. We were 
treading on dead bodies. The SS-women treated us very severely; in 
particular, they would beat us during roll calls without any 
apparent reason. The sick were not treated at all, and corpses 
remained in the blocks for days. We could not obtain water, and 
thirst made us suffer indescribably, and because of the water 
shortage everyone got lice also in this camp. People were so weak 
from starvation that they could hardly walk. There were 500 people 
crammed into a block and if we did not run back into the block 
after roll call there was not even room for sitting down.

In the middle of April, the glorious English troops suddenly 
arrived. Earlier, we heard intense shooting and bombing. In the 
meanwhile, some of the SS soldiers had run away.
English troops made sure that the sick were carried into hospital, 
while we they carried us by trucks to Bergen a week later. They 
disinfected us and gave us clean clothes and the best provisions. 
We carried on towards Zelle, where we had a few weeks of rest and 
left for home already in better condition.