The person in question has given us the following information:

Jewish Laws concerned me in 1940, when Hungarians came in and 
seized my thresher, the land, the shop, and the cauldron for 
making spirits. In short, they seized everything. Local 
authorities carried this out very fast. Three Jewish families 
lived in Vica, three were well-off and one family was poor.

In 1944, when the Germans invaded Hungary, on the 3rd of May 
gendarmes came at 5 am to our house and commanded us to get packed 
in 20 minutes because they were going to carry us away. They did 
not let us pack food or clothes. We had to leave our flat, the 
furniture, the clothing; we had to leave everything. Gendarmes 
seized our golden watch, jewellery, and money.

The day after, we arrived in the brick factory of Szamosújvár. 
Here, gendarmes started to interrogate us and beat us. There was 
also a detective from Pest, and they tortured us with heated iron 
to make us hand over jewellery and money. If they stopped, they 
would continue beating us the following day. To make it clear, 
they demanded our own jewellery and money.

We were in a horribly overcrowded place and had little opportunity 
to have proper food supplies. We spent here 14 days before we 
carried on towards the ghetto of Kolozsvár, where we spent 4 days. 
Later, the headquarters gave us the command to move on to the area 
of the Danube, where we were promised to have a good life. It 
turned out that they were carrying us towards a completely 
different destination.

One morning, they entrained us (they put 60 of us in a freight 
car) and we left. They did not give us anything to eat or drink in 
the car. Gendarmes had beaten us as long as I finally left them 
the packs, which we had carried into the ghetto.

On the 5th of June 1944, we arrived in Auschwitz-Birkenau. When we 
got off train they right away separated me from my family, took me 
into the baths, where they cut my hair off, disinfected me, and 
dressed me up in striped prisoners clothes. From the baths they 
led us into barracks where they lodged us. Our days passed with 
the beatings we got from our supervisors. They did not give us 
anything to eat. A few days later, lice started to spread and 
almost consumed us.

Around a week later they started to march us towards 
Schwentlechovitz, which was 50 kilometres from Auschwitz. They 
chased us for two days, forcing us to march, kept harassing us and 
shooting around but they gave us no food.

We arrived in Schwentlechovitz, where they lodged us in barracks. 
We started working immediately. There was a canon factory next to 
the camp, where we went to work. We worked 12 hours a day in day 
and night shifts changing shift every fortnight. They beat us all 
the time also here and hurried us at work. We got turnips or 
rotten potatoes to eat. 

We have a horrible memory from this place. Five kids from Pest 
were hanged because they wanted to escape. We had to watch it. I 
will never forget it. 

Upon the pressure of the Russians, they took us to Mauthausen in 
the beginning of February. Once again, they killed and murdered 
people on the way.

When we arrived in Mauthausen we were put in quarantine where we 
spent 3 weeks. We had a very bad life, they would harass us and 
starve us. We were full of lice, which made us suffer.

They took us from Mauthausen to Gusen I., where we went to work 
again. We worked for a weapon plant 12 hours a day in awful 
conditions. As everywhere, they hurried us again a great deal at 
work, and made us work harder with beatings. If we committed an 
error we immediately got 25 blows with the club.

We were already very weak here because they gave us altogether 100 
grams of bread, half a litre of soup, and bitter coffee in the 
morning without sugar, while we had to do hard physical work. 
Naturally, we fell into poor condition.

We were already swarming with lice: they literally almost consumed 
us.

There was a sad event also in Gusen. They hanged a kid called 
Vicei because he had stolen a brush that he wanted to swap for 
food. This poor kid had starved a lot, too.

Our sad, miserable life continued till the 4th of May when the 
English and the Americans liberated us. From then on we had a good 
life. 

These have been my own experiences.