The person in question has given us the following information:


There were only four Jewish families in Marosjánosi. They lived from 
agriculture, and my father was also a farmer. He was a war invalid to a degree 
of 75%. We could live well of the income of our house and lands. 

The 7th of April 1944, two Germans entered the house during the night without 
any prior notice or warning and started to beat my handicapped father with the 
butt. Apart from my parents there was also my younger brother in the room, we 
tried to defend ourselves, and our father, and countered the attackers. One of 
them ran away while the other one went on fighting. A Christian neighbour, a 
communist, came and helped us, so we managed to chase away also the other 
soldier and his weapon remained in our flat. We did not know what to do with the 
weapon, I set off to bring it to the Village Hall at 12,30 am but suddenly a 
German soldier came out of a ditch and I did not dare to proceed. I knocked on 
the door of the Jewish family, the Frieds but no one answered so I ran back 
home. No one in the family wanted to stay home, we were scared of consequences 
and went into hiding in the neighbours place leaving the weapon outside next to 
our fence.

It may not regard the story but I want to add here that still in 1938, the 19th 
of November, Hungarian militiamen invaded the community and arrested all Jews of 
the village and executed the same night the Jews of Dercen and of Formos and 
also the magistrate of Dercen.

In April, three members of my family were taken into the ghetto, which was the 
brick factory of Beregszász, while my father could stay home as a privileged 
person. He visited us in the ghetto every day crying that he could not stay home 
but soon his privileged state was annulled and he was also taken into the 
ghetto. The next day gendarmes surrounded the ghetto and demanded all the 
jewellery and money we had. They threatened that if we disobeyed they would kill 
the head of the family in question and hand the other members over to the 
Gestapo and the SS. We had to hand in the wedding ring of my mother and the 80 
peng?s we still owned. This was followed by a most brutal search. They 
disregarded if you were a man or a woman you had to undress and they searched 

There were only four Jewish families in Marosjánosi. They lived from 
agriculture, and my father was also a farmer. He was a war invalid to a degree 
of 75%. We could live well of the income of our house and lands. 

The 7th of April 1944, two Germans entered the house during the night without 
any prior notice or warning and started to beat my handicapped father with the 
butt. Apart from my parents there was also my younger brother in the room, we 
tried to defend ourselves, and our father, and countered the attackers. One of 
them ran away while the other one went on fighting. A Christian neighbour, a 
communist, came and helped us, so we managed to chase away also the other 
soldier and his weapon remained in our flat. We did not know what to do with the 
weapon, I set off to bring it to the Village Hall at 12,30 am but suddenly a 
German soldier came out of a ditch and I did not dare to proceed. I knocked on 
the door of the Jewish family, the Frieds but no one answered so I ran back 
home. No one in the family wanted to stay home, we were scared of consequences 
and went into hiding in the neighbours place leaving the weapon outside next to 
our fence.

It may not regard the story but I want to add here that still in 1938, the 19th 
of November, Hungarian militiamen invaded the community and arrested all Jews of 
the village and executed the same night the Jews of Dercen and of Formos and 
also the magistrate of Dercen.

In April, three members of my family were taken into the ghetto, which was the 
brick factory of Beregszász, while my father could stay home as a privileged 
person. He visited us in the ghetto every day crying that he could not stay home 
but soon his privileged state was annulled and he was also taken into the 
ghetto. The next day gendarmes surrounded the ghetto and demanded all the 
jewellery and money we had. They threatened that if we disobeyed they would kill 
the head of the family in question and hand the other members over to the 
Gestapo and the SS. We had to hand in the wedding ring of my mother and the 80 
peng?s we still owned. This was followed by a most brutal search. They 
disregarded if you were a man or a woman you had to undress and they searched 
you like that. They collected buckets of jewellery and silver objects, and 
grabbed also copper ones. The mayor of the town was Kálmán Hubay, while the 
members of the Jewish Council were: Péter Reismann, Hermann Hartmann, and 
Kesztenbaum. They risked their lives when at entrainment they threw into the 
freight cars two sacks of nuts despite severe bans.

One morning, a member of the Gestapo appeared and ordered us to dig 30 graves by 
10.30 am the day after, he also indicated their size. Young men were selected 
for the task and they did the job. There was a great panic since we did not know 
why the graves were needed but it turned out that the goal was only to cause 
panic.

We left with the second transport the 17th of May. There were 86 people crammed 
in our freight car. There was another search before entrainment, when we had to 
undress again and they seized almost everything we had, even the food; we could 
keep only a set of clothes. They gave us no water before departure, and even 
grabbed the jar of water that someone kept in the hand, and there was not a 
bucket for the toilet either. Before we departed a Serbian baker came to the 
train (he was a communist) and gave two loaves of bread to us. Although the 
guards did not want to allow him, he managed to slide them into the car when the 
guards looked away. I have to note that the same baker Sztojanovics paid 200,000 
peng?s when the Jews were ordered to collect a million peng?s as a payoff within 
24 hours. But he also made an appeal for Jewish workforce when we were in the 
ghetto and he paid them more than the maximal wage and gave them also bread. As 
a result, he was threatened to be interned. On the way no one escaped from our 
car and no one died either. In Kassa they opened the cars. Labour servicemen 
gave us water, and Germans took charge of the train. Hungarian gendarmes had 
nasty manners, they whistled to us when we left, threw dirt on us. By chance we 
crossed the area where my father had been injured during the First War. Poor 
him, he started crying as it was the place where his health had been destroyed 
to a degree of 75% - all in vain.

In Krakow, on a small station a train driver asked who we were. We told him we 
were Jews. He replied that men and women who were fit for work would survive but 
children, the elderly and people with eye problems would be executed in gas 
chambers.

The 21st of May 1945, Friday night, we arrived in Auschwitz, and stayed in 
freight cars till the morning of the following day when Polish prisoners in 
striped clothes came to receive us, together with SS soldiers. We had to leave 
the luggage on train and we were forced to line up, five in a line, men and 
women separately, mothers could take their children. Dr Mengele stopped in front 
of the freight cars with clenched fists. I was walking with my mother, who was 
42 years old, arm in arm. When Dr Mengele saw that we were young he asked 
whether we were sisters. My poor mother got terribly frightened and replied in 
terror that we were mother and daughter. He gave a blow with a leather crop in 
between of us, so forcefully that my hand felt like breaking off the body. He 
sent me to the right side and my mother to the left. I tried to call back my 
mother but of course the beast did not let her come. I wanted to run after her. 
I immediately knew that I lost her for good. The group they selected for work 
queued up again and they took us into disinfecting rooms. On the way I met my 
brother who desperately told me that he got separated from our father, and I 
knew I lost him as well.

We arrived in front of the baths where we stayed for three hours in the sun. I 
looked up at the door and read the note: "Gaskammer". As we found out it was not 
the crematorium itself. We were led into the dressing room where there were 
1,400 of us surrounded by 200 SS soldiers. We were ordered to take off all 
clothes, we could only keep on the shoes and the protecting glasses. We obeyed 
with initial embarrassment. They cut the hair off, made us have a bath, gave us 
underwear and a sack-like grey dress and we had to line up, five people in a 
line. We searched for relatives and people we knew but we looked so much 
different from our normal human look that we did not recognise each other. I 
held very nice shoes in the hand, which caught the eye of an SS woman who took 
them and as a gift she gave me a brown and a red shoe both for the right foot. 
We stayed another two hours in the sun before we moved into block 9 of Camp A, 
where there were 1,400 of us, 16 of us lay on a berth, or more precisely wanted 
to lie as the room was so overcrowded that you could not lie down. Food was a 
quarter of a loaf of bread. We ate 16 of us from a pot, naturally without a 
spoon. The soup was inedible, in the evening they gave us bread with a slice of 
salami. At 3 am we were woken and had to go to the Appellplatz in dark. We 
stayed there for 2-3 hours in mud, or in the sun, and repeated the same in the 
afternoon.

I stayed in Auschwitz for six weeks, every day I heard sadder and sadder news. I 
could not work, and that was even worse. Six weeks later they put together a 
transport. As I was already very thin I did not hope to be selected but I had 
luck. In the afternoon they threatened us that this transport would be taken 
into the crematorium. As a result, many of us tried to get away from the blocks. 
They started to shoot around, and many got in injured. Luckily, I did not try to 
escape.

After three days of travel we arrived in Gelsenkirchen. We received two-thirds 
of a loaf of bread, a portion of margarine, cheese and salami for the journey. 
There were 50 of us in a freight car; we had to sit leaning our backs to each 
other. One of the guards was a Wehrmacht soldier, the other one was an SS man 
who did not let us drink water. We arrived in Gelsenkirchen, and were 
accommodated in a tent, 500 of us in a block, 6-7 of us in a bed, we had also 
two blankets and were very happy about it. Food was somewhat better than in 
Auschwitz. We could wash here without problems; we still had no lice. We had to 
clear debris in ten hours a day.

Six weeks later, the 22nd of August we were transported into Essen to work for 
Krupp Co. Here I became a factory worker, working in Walzwerke 2. We worked 12 
hours a day in day and night shifts. This job  we had to straighten screws with 
a pressing machine  would have been hard even for men. The rations you got 
doing this hard job was a third of a loaf of bread, twice a day some cooked food 
and zulag. We could not complain about accommodation: everyone had a bed and two 
blankets. My hand got infected during work and as a result I had pus in the 
breast. I asked for a day off in the infirmary but the reply was a blow with the 
crop. We went to work by tram. There were bombings day and night, they did not 
even let us sleep, and we were not allowed to run into bunkers. It was 
unbearable: bombs were falling all around while women guards naturally ran away. 
The 24th of October, we experienced a huge bombing, the plant and the camp were 
destroyed and they crammed us  522 women  into the dining room. From now on, 
we had no opportunity to wash ourselves; we shared the fate of beasts. We also 
stopped using the tram, and had to walk 16 kilometres daily in shoes with wooden 
soles. We got only a plate of food that was more like warm water than cooked 
food: one day cabbage the other day turnip. The 12th of December, they selected 
a new kommando and I became a member of the hospital kommando. In secret we 
produced slippers here, this is how I sustained myself. The negligible food we 
had would not have sufficed. This lasted till the 2nd of March, when we were 
already about to leave Essen. I became a member of a street kommando and 
walked 23 kilometres a day, but luckily this ended the 18th of March. 
Afterwards, on a Saturday morning we went to the station of Bochun, where 
carriages were prepared for us with broken windows, pieces of glass were all 
around. We sat in draught pressed to each other, we had no places for sitting or 
lying. For the journey of nine days we got a loaf and a half of bread, 100 grams 
of salami, 50 grams of margarine. In the last three days there was nothing to 
eat any more, and we realised we could not stand any more. There was a transport 
of men connected to the train that left us in Weimar, where we received a sixth 
of a loaf of bread and 10 grams of margarine before we continued towards Bergen-
Belsen. We asked our guards where we were heading but had no reply.

A Sunday morning, the 27th of March, we arrived in Bergen-Belsen. On our arrival 
we got a sixth of a loaf of bread, which I finished fast and two hours later I 
felt that the bread was most probably poisoned. The day after 61 people died out 
of 500. Later, we did not receive bread from Germans. One could see at first 
sight that the camp was a death camp. In the middle of the block there was a 
tent full of cadavers: corpses of around 500 women. Daily ration was half a 
litre of turnip soup. Our bodies were swarming with lice, they sucked our blood, 
and many got spotted fever. Thank God I stayed here only two weeks and in quite 
a good condition. Every day we were fewer, and it was distressing to watch as 
dead bodies were pulled by ropes by the so called muslims, who were themselves 
bags of bones. One day the SS ordered me to take part in digging mass graves 
outside. I was prepared to dig it for myself. This time I noticed that at the 
other end of the camp there were interned people from Pest, children and old 
people. I was happy and surprised to see them alive, and I wanted to have a talk 
with them. I did not know that it was prohibited to approach the wire fence. The 
guard took a few shots and targeted his weapon at me so I had to leave the 
fence. The people of Pest were evacuated two days later. The 15th of April, the 
first English tanks appeared, there was great shooting and the SS disappeared 
all of a sudden, although there had been already many who had run away before. 
Hungarian soldiers targeted at Jewish girls, shot also my friend Ilona Rosner, 
but several other girls died that time. We were already so hungry that we 
collected carrot peels off the ground; we did not even have the daily soup. But 
later we had a good life, we lived under splendid conditions: two in a room; my 
roommate was a Polish girl. We were provided with excellent food and got 
everything we needed. I left the hospital the 4th of June but remained in a 
disinfecting camp. I started left for home with a Czech transport the 7th of 
July. We crossed Pilsen, Prague and Pozsony before we arrived to Budapest.

Future plans: I will look for my younger brother who is already home. I have not 
decided about the future, I want to discuss it with him.