The persons in question have given us the following information:


As a cow merchant our father earned a lot. We lived in our own 
house and had no financial worries.

The above-mentioned Hajnal Jung: When the Germans invaded the 
country I happened to be in Budapest. That day, the 19th of March, 
I wanted to travel home and went to Keleti railway station, where 
they captured me and put me in detention, later sent me to 
Kistarcsa, from where I was deported with the first transport. On 
the 19th of April, we were already in Auschwitz, where later I met 
my mother and younger sister. Our train arrived still at the 
railway station of Auschwitz and we were those who constructed the 
rail to Birkenau for the others.

Aforementioned wife of Eisik Jung: the documents of my husband and 
father were not all right. Probably because they had been 
denounced they had to report every Sunday still before the Germans 
arrived, therefore we went to the brick factory, the ghetto of 
Munkács even earlier. Richer men and politically unreliable 
persons were crammed into a lock-up, where they made them do 
sport, and beat them. They kept searching us in the brick 
factory, and soon they entrained us. 70 of us travelled in a 
freight car. At departure they gave us water and buckets for the 
toilet. Gendarmes escorted us till Kassa, where the Germans took 
charge of the train. In Kassa we once again received water from 
labour servicemen. On the way, no one died in our freight car, and 
I do not know of anyone who escaped.

We travelled for three days before we arrived in Birkenau, where 
Polish prisoners in striped clothes helped us get off. Men and 
women had to line up separately, and they marched us to the baths, 
and cut our hair off. The two of us went to Camp A. There were 
1,320 of us in a block, 14 of us on a bunk. Three weeks later, 
they gave us tattoos and we started to work in various commandos, 
among others we worked in Brezinka sorting out clothes and luggage 
for 6 weeks. We could have easily obtained here food but we could 
not eat because of what we saw every day and the anxieties we felt 
about it. At the two sides there were the two crematoria, in the 
middle there was the road and we had to walk on this road to our 
workplace. Going to work or coming from work we often saw 
transports of people from a distance of only 200 steps. We saw 
undressed men who were already in the courtyard; their clothes 
were in a bunch on the ground. We heard crying children from the 
courtyard, and sometimes we saw naked people also through the open 
gates. Coming from work we often saw also cars carrying naked 
people; and these cars were going at a high speed. Often, 
transports of people were brought here also from Camp C. They were 
still dressed. On these occasions there was always a block curfew 
but nevertheless we saw them and we were also often lined up in 
front of Camp A for roll call.

The aforementioned Hajnal Jung: when I arrived I worked on road 
construction for three weeks. Reveille was already at 2 am, and at 
2.30 we were already working till 4 or 5 in the afternoon without 
a lunch break. We got the small portion of bread together with 
some jam in the evening, and when we returned from work we got 
some soup. Three weeks later they took us to the baths. There were 
selections and I went for a transport and became part of the 
Kanadakommando. I worked here until ca. the 15th of October. We 
sorted out things that arrived from the crematoria. Once, we saw 
the gas chamber, where the luggage that was tied together was 
disinfected. The windows got bricked up and we started having evil 
forebodings. The following day we indeed saw names written up, 
names of members of the Sonderkommando, who were done in still 
that day, but we saw them also on the road when two cars carried 
them into the gas chamber.
 
Our workplace was far away; the road was very bad, it was muddy; 
our shoes were ragged, and we had to go to bed in wet muddy 
stockings, otherwise we could not have put the shoes on the 
following morning. We were already so desperate that we were close 
to wishing to die.

We worked also in the Aussenkommando, and when we finished our 
daily work we carried wood into the courtyard of the crematorium. 
They had already started to dismantle the crematorium. We saw the 
sign To disinfecting, and when we went out during the night we 
often saw huge flames and continuously felt the stink of burnt 
flash and bones. 

We also worked in the weaving mill. We worked there ca. 12 hours a 
day. Although it was not hard work, demands for work efficiency 
were high. We prepared fuses out of dirty rags. It was a dirty 
job.

Selections were quite frequent in September-October, but people 
were separated also without selections. The three of us managed to 
stay together till the end. On the 30th of December, they put us in 
a transport and we went to Bergen-Belsen. We arrived on the 2nd of 
January. There were ca. 800 people in a block, three of us slept 
in a bed. Rations comprised one sixth of a loaf of bread, three 
quarters of a litre of turnip soup, margarine, and coffee. We 
spent a week in this camp before we were moved into another one, 
where we lay on the floor, and became full of lice. We did not 
even work here. We did not get bread in this camp. Earlier, we got 
one twelfth but later for two weeks we saw no bread at all. In the 
end, we had to carry to the kitchen the quantity of water that we 
got as soup from a distance of around two kilometres.

We have heard that there was also a crematorium here, but they 
burnt corpses also in the open. Cadavers were piled in a way that 
a row of bad old shoes was followed by a row of wood and a row of 
corpses. Directly before liberation we saw that Muslims were 
pulling by ropes the cadavers that had been carried out of blocks 
towards the crematorium. 

All three of us lay sick with typhus for three weeks. After the 
15th of April, which was the day of liberation, we got into a clean 
block, where we recovered. Liberating English soldiers carried us 
to Bergen, where we stayed for 3-4 weeks before we moved on 
towards Cell, from where we returned to Budapest with a Czech 
transport via Pilsen, Prague and Pozsony.