The persons in question have given us the following information:

      (V.Sámuel) In accordance with Jewish laws, I had to lose my job. The 15th 
of May, 19## I had to join the labour service in Jászberény. In 1940, I spent 3 
months in labour service. I was called up in Nagykáta, and spent time in #ahora 
and Bástyaháza, when finally I was dismissed because I was older than 40. The 
15th of May, 1944, I was called up in Jászberény, was sent to Pusztamizse, and 
later to Budapest, to Nagyfuvaros Street No. 4. There were various kinds of work 
to do. We cleared ruins in the Pannónia plant, from where I escaped into a Swiss 
protected house. They caught me on the 2nd of December. The Arrow Cross 
surrounded the house and took me to Szt. István wharf, and from there to Teleki 
Square. The day after, they seized all our belongings and took us to Józsefváros 
railway station.
      
      (V.Sándor) In 1938, in accordance with Jewish laws, I had to cease 
publishing my journal titled "Independent Critique (Független Kritika). I found 
a job as a cabinetmaker. In 1940, on the 1st of April, I was drafted for labour 
service in Piliscsaba and the 26th of July was transferred to Körösmez?. We had 
a bad life here. It used to be a mixed company where there were both Jews and 
Christians and it was the first time we were separated; this statute was 
effective since then. In 1943, I was again drafted for the labour service at 
Károly barracks and was sent to Lelesz. Nothing special happened there; we did 
not live badly. Three months later I was sent home and went on working. The 2nd 
of June, 1944, I was drafted for service in Jászberény where I stayed together 
with my brother. 
      
      (G.L.) In 1940, I spent three months in labour service. In 1942, I had a 
job when I was summoned. Since the 3rd of July I did labour service 
consecutively for 28 months. I was in Transylvania in 3-4 different places, and 
in Budapest in a military plant for almost a year. I got hold of Swiss 
protection. They took me to Garrison Albrecht from a boys orphanage. From there 
they took me to Tutaj Street, from where we escaped and entered the internment 
camp in Colombus Street. They took me from there to Teleki Square 1#. We spent a 
night here, they seized all our belongings, and we left the country. We could 
keep only our coats, caps and boots.
      
      ( L.A.) Jewish laws concerned me first in July of 1942 when I was released 
from my job. I started to do some ### work. On the 1#th of May, 194# I was 
drafted for labour service in Aszód, as a privileged officer, ### I was not ###, 
1st Lieutenant ### was the most bloodthirsty person in Zombor, he cruelly beat 
people till blood started flowing. He did it ###. When in labour service in 
Zombor, they also terribly tortured us. I went into hiding in the hospital of 
### and when I brought home a letter of protection to my family, I was captured 
and was taken to the protected house in ### street and they dragged me and my 
family to Teleki Square No. ## and took us to Józsefváros railway station the 
4th of December.
      
      There were 70 of us in a freight car. They gave us no food. The 
blacksmiths of Ács were really nasty to us in Ács. They gave us food in return 
for watches and money, and asked money even for water. Men and women stayed 
together in the cars. They demanded valuable pieces of cloth and jewels. They 
recognised only ### and Doxa as valid currency and gave a mouthful of bread for 
them in return. We were not allowed to go to the toilet. Germans took charge of 
us in Zürndorf, where we first got bread and some soup.
      
      The 14th of December, we arrived in Bergen-Belsen. We got off and they 
seized all our belongings, all our bags, except for covers and towels. ### was a 
strike with a stick. They put us up in the barracks of the camp. We were around 
#00 of us here. In a 60-centimetre-wide place # people lay. The day after we got 
back our luggage but much clothing and food went missing. This was a 
Sonderlager. We passed these days waiting for lunch and dinner that we did not 
get. It happened that they gave us lunch at 7 am and the next time we got lunch 
was at 7 pm the day after. In between, at the most we got some soup or coffee. 
The menu was 7 decilitres of turnip cooked in water. 250 grams of bread and 25 
grams of margarine accompanied it. We did not have to work. People died of 
typhus and of starvation. Mortality was around 10-15 a day out of 4,000 people. 
Dead bodies were carried away. We believe they burnt them. There was opportunity 
to wash; we washed together with women.
      
      The 7th of April, 1945, upon American pressure we set off. They entrained 
us. On the way, the 13th of April, the 9th Army Corps of the Americans captured 
us in Farsleben. We were transported to Hillesleben where we had a good life.
      
      These were our personal experiences.