The person in question has given us the following information:

In 1944, when the Germans came in, I managed to escape to Kolozsvár. I got 
documents from the Zionist movement, but I could not stay in Kolozsvár. I was 
called up for company no. 110/64 in Nagybánya. From there I was taken to 
Nagyvárad to work. I contacted the Zionist movement again. Ghettos started to be 
set up. People were helped to escape from the Nagyvárad ghetto to Romania.

On one of my journeys I was arrested and brought to Budapest. Here I managed to 
sneak into the clothes gathering company in Sípos street, where I met those 
comrades of mine from the 64th company to whom I had given documents to be used 
in Pest. With these papers I could move fairly freely, and on the 15th of 
October, 1944, two days before Horthys declaration, I moved to 2 Klauzál 
Square. 2 days later, after Horthys declaration, I could not go back to my flat 
any more. I went back to the clothes-gathering company, and from there I could 
not leave, the movement tried everything, but they could not get me out, the 
Germans took me to the Józsefváros railway station with a transport of labourers 
of about 1500 people. It was very difficult. There were many of us, ca. 80 
people in a freight car; my two best friends died on the road before Munich. 
They gave us no food on the journey; we only ate what we had brought with us.

Having arrived in Munich we were locked up in freight cars. The train left and 
we were told to be going to the edge of some forest to do some good job. But 
after a short while we could not go on with the train, the German commander told 
us that Russians arrived and we could get off the freight cars. There was total 
chaos, so I told people not to go anywhere, but a group jumped off and started 
to pillage the neighbouring family houses. A German squad appeared from 
somewhere and started a horrible attack on us that lasted for ca. 2 hours. I 
forgot to mention that back in Munich another very long train had been attached 
to ours with ca. 16,000-17,000 people. 8,000-9,000 people died in this volley, 
there were dead bodies all over. Blood was flowing from people. Later, we were 
liberated by an English troop, who gave us food and took us back to Feldafing. 
This was at the end of April, 1945, ever since I have worked for the Americans 
at the Feldafing camp for the Anglo-American secret police.

I arrived home on the 20th of September. I learned that at home no one had come 
back yet, now I will go and look for the Zionist movement and then emigrate to 
Palestine.