The person in question has given us the following information:

The 23rd of October 1944, I was summoned to the grounds of National Centre for 
High School Sports Clubs, from where the Arrow Cross took us to the grounds of 
Újpest Sports Club, where we set up an emergency medical and first aid centre. 
2-3 days later, we started walking towards Isaszeg, to the Szent György manor. 
There were elderly people and people of all age groups, but all women. We slept 
in the open, and were rushed during the whole trip. We received no food, lived 
on the food we had taken from home. 

We arrived in Isaszeg the 28th of October. They lodged 3 companies in this small 
manor, altogether 750 people. Women lived here on the attic and were guarded by 
the Arrow Cross, while Russian war prisoners lived downstairs and were guarded 
by Germans. We got sometimes coffee in the morning, and we had a dense soup and 
bread for lunch. I became a member of the medical group and was the medical 
supervisor in our company. Day and night, whenever there was need, I was at 
work, particularly as there were a great number of sick women among us. It was 
because we had had no health control before we departed and the long walk put 
them in poor condition. They were footsore and suffered of a serious diarrhoea 
infection. We checked these people together with a woman doctor. They took to 
work only the healthy but at the end also those who had a temperature lower than 
38 C degrees. They went on threatening us that an SS doctor was going to control 
us and if he would not consider the people we were curing sick, we would be 
executed.
 
One day, around the 5th of November, two gendarmes appeared and declared they 
would decide who was sick and who was not, and sent everyone to work even those 
who had a temperature of 40 C degrees. This time the Arrow Cross executed a 
little girl because they claimed she wanted to get away. I cannot remember her 
name. I witnessed how they executed in the woods six of the labour servicemen 
who stayed in a neighbouring manor; we had to dig their graves. A lieutenant 
kept coming from the Hungarian Army since he wanted to take charge of us but the 
Arrow Cross insisted and failed to hand us over. 

A Saturday night they put on the alarm and we had to start walking towards 
Gödöll?. In Gödöll? we met the same Hungarian lieutenant who told us that we 
were now going to walk back to Budapest, where they would dismiss us. We started 
walking back and arrived in Újpest after three days walk. We were terribly 
The 23rd of October 1944, I was summoned to the grounds of National Centre for 
High School Sports Clubs, from where the Arrow Cross took us to the grounds of 
Újpest Sports Club, where we set up an emergency medical and first aid centre. 
2-3 days later, we started walking towards Isaszeg, to the Szent György manor. 
There were elderly people and people of all age groups, but all women. We slept 
in the open, and were rushed during the whole trip. We received no food, lived 
on the food we had taken from home. 

We arrived in Isaszeg the 28th of October. They lodged 3 companies in this small 
manor, altogether 750 people. Women lived here on the attic and were guarded by 
the Arrow Cross, while Russian war prisoners lived downstairs and were guarded 
by Germans. We got sometimes coffee in the morning, and we had a dense soup and 
bread for lunch. I became a member of the medical group and was the medical 
supervisor in our company. Day and night, whenever there was need, I was at 
work, particularly as there were a great number of sick women among us. It was 
because we had had no health control before we departed and the long walk put 
them in poor condition. They were footsore and suffered of a serious diarrhoea 
infection. We checked these people together with a woman doctor. They took to 
work only the healthy but at the end also those who had a temperature lower than 
38 C degrees. They went on threatening us that an SS doctor was going to control 
us and if he would not consider the people we were curing sick, we would be 
executed.
 
One day, around the 5th of November, two gendarmes appeared and declared they 
would decide who was sick and who was not, and sent everyone to work even those 
who had a temperature of 40 C degrees. This time the Arrow Cross executed a 
little girl because they claimed she wanted to get away. I cannot remember her 
name. I witnessed how they executed in the woods six of the labour servicemen 
who stayed in a neighbouring manor; we had to dig their graves. A lieutenant 
kept coming from the Hungarian Army since he wanted to take charge of us but the 
Arrow Cross insisted and failed to hand us over. 

A Saturday night they put on the alarm and we had to start walking towards 
Gödöll?. In Gödöll? we met the same Hungarian lieutenant who told us that we 
were now going to walk back to Budapest, where they would dismiss us. We started 
walking back and arrived in Újpest after three days walk. We were terribly 
rushed during the trip, while they shot those who fell behind. We did not get 
anything to eat; the last time we got some bread with jam was in Gödöll?. The 
whole transport, that is, around three companies, had left for Újpest. I do not 
know how many of us got shot on the road. 

When we got to Újpest they started to zigzag with us through the whole town. 
People stopped in the street and cried and we kept asking when we were going to 
be dismissed as the lieutenant had promised it. Finally we arrived to Megyer, 
from where we travelled to Pünkösdfürd? by ferry. We had to sleep here in the 
open and a few companies of men joined us. Policemen took charge of us, and we 
walked down to the brick factory of Óbuda.

We arrived in the brick factory at night and a great number of people escaped in 
the dark. The following noon we had to leave for Piliscsaba on foot. When we 
arrived in the evening we got some really terrible soup. We could not sleep 
since we were so crammed. As a result, the next morning we had to carry on. This 
is how we kept walking crossing the country till the 18th of November. We were 
hungry and thirsty as the rations we received were inedible whatever hunger we 
had. At every stop our escort was replaced. If we crossed villages with 
Hungarian population peasants gave us whatever they had. 

The 18th of November, Germans took charge of us at the border of Hegyeshalom. 
From there we walked 10 kilometres till Zürndorf. When Germans took charge of us 
and saw that elderly women could not walk and bring their luggage any more 
because they were tired, they handed over their luggage to men and asked them to 
help these women. Germans were still polite with us. 

Having been entrained in Zürndorf we got some more serious meal: barley gruel 
together with a loaf of bread, some cheese and margarine. 65 of us stayed in a 
freight car. The day after, we got water at a larger station and could also get 
off to wash. Two days later, we arrived in Camp 11 of Kaufering. 

We got off train on a large open field, where men and women were separated. We 
had to queue up five people in a line, and set off towards the camp in groups of 
100. Before we entered the camp we went into a small house where they took our 
rucksacks, bags, even the coats of some of us, so we walked into the camp 
without luggage. Our block of 60 people was in a bunker. We slept on wooden 
bunks with a little straw on them, 30 women at both sides of the bunker. This 
camp was relatively clean but we could not wash because the camp was not yet 
finished, at the beginning it did not even have a roof. When we arrived we got 
bread, jam, and margarine.

Two days later, me and my friend, the woman doctor, went to see the doctor of 
the camp and they set up a ward for women patients, an HKB (Häftling 
Krankenbaut). (Before we arrived there were only men in this camp.) At the 
beginning, a lot of women died, 2-3 every day because they got exhausted of the 
journey and were enfeebled by diarrhoea since we had received no medicine at 
all. I stayed in the HKB as a nurse till they lowered the number of women in the 
camp from an initial 1200 to 250, having transported women together with the 
sick into other camps. The Lagerführer declared that out of 250 at the most 15-
20 sick women could stay in the ward. If there were more of them, from time to 
time they transferred the surplus into the camp of the sick. As there was no 
need for more than one person to look after this number of patients I got 
selectedfor a kommando. First, I was a member of the Holzmann kommando, and we 
constructed rails for a narrow-gauge railway for around two weeks. Later, I was 
put into the Reche Todt-Kommando, where I worked in the kitchen. At the end of 
January or the beginning of February, typhus started to spread, hence they 
closed up the camp and we stayed in quarantine. People had a bath and got 
disinfected every week. At the end, keeping us in quarantine was a good deed 
even if we got much less to eat since much fewer people died of typhus as of 
working in kommandos. The quarantine was withdrawn at the beginning of March, 
when I went out to work for Moll to chop wood in a forest. 

During this period Germans completely went wild. If someone did not work enough 
or was not fast enough right away the foremen reported it to the Lagerführer. 
Punishment was either that they cut your hair off or that you had to stand for 
hours between the wires. 

The 21st of April, the camp was alarmed during the night. They claimed we were 
going to walk towards Tirol where they would hand us over to the Red Cross. On 
the way, one of the SS men, who was a Rapportführer, let us know that in fact 
Himmler ordered to execute all Jews. 

After two days walk we arrived to Dachau. As there was no place for us we were 
redirected towards Allach to spend a night there. The day after the whole 
transport had to line up again and they told us that we were going to continue 
our walk towards Tirol. 

The Lagerführer told us that the people who could not walk should step aside, 
since we needed to walk at a fast pace 35-40 kilometres a day. Many of us 
stepped aside. The SS Aufseherin walked to them and took the better shoes off 
their feet, saying that they would not be needed anyway, while those who decided 
to carry on could not walk in bad boots. We got really frightened and the major 
part of people already wanted to rejoin the others. The Lagerführer came to us 
and said we should not worry as we were going to be free in two days but we did 
not believe him. They took us, the people who did not venture on the trip, back 
into the camp. This was a mixed camp, where there were also political prisoners, 
who later threw us food across the wires.

The 28th of April, SS guards disappeared from watchtowers and prisoners replaced 
them. In the evening, Americans started to siege Allach, which lasted for around 
6-7 hours. Men of the Arian camp cut the wires and led us into an air raid 
shelter. We came out the day after at dawn, when the womens camp was moved into 
the SS barracks. These were comfortable wooden huts with smaller and larger 
rooms. The first American soldier arrived at 11.30 am. 

During the siege 25 people died and several got injured because a bombshell hit 
the infirmary and the barracks. 

At the beginning, I could not believe we were truly free. I was immensely happy, 
and later had a particularly good life because I worked in an American team 
using my English knowledge. 

The 6th of June, we left Allach for Feldafing by car. It is the nicest place in 
Bavaria, where I worked for the Military Government and the CIC till the 10th of 
September, when we entered Garrison Dr. Funk, where we were entrained to start 
back home. As far as I know this was the first transport. We got provisions for 
8 days, whereas people in later transports had to starve a lot. 

I met my mother who unfortunately had lost much of weight but she is vigorous 
and energetic. I have had so many new impulses and have now so much fresh energy 
that presently I do not know what I should do.