The person in question has given us the following information:

As a start, I have to comment that all actions, processes, and negotiations that 
regard either the times before "Vadász Street" or the emigration, e.g. the 
letters of protection, the protected houses, etc. were initiated and thought out 
by the Budapest office (the Palestine Office) of the Jewish Agency and by the 
Palestine Committee. The key and the condition of the success of these 
activities was the good rapport that existed between the Swiss Consulate (e.g. 
the consul) and the Palestine Office. It was the Swiss Consulate, or more 
precisely, its special department called Delegation of Foreign Interests that 
represented the interests of both England and the US after they declared war and 
also the case of emigration to Palestine, that is, the interests of the people 
who wished to emigrate to Palestine. I have to add right away that as far as 
circumstances allowed the consulate, especially consul Charles Lutz, did a great 
work representing these interests. The friendship that evolved through the 
permanent contact between consul Lutz and the head of the Palestine Office, 
Miklós Krausz was of great use both concerning these initiations and their 
successful execution. This friendship let its beneficial influence felt in all 
activities of Vadász Street. The establishing of the Vadász Street office was in 
particular the merit of Miklós Krausz, which he  as a Zionist and the 
representative of Szochnut in Hungary - wanted to use for saving Zionist youth 
and cháluc figures, that is, people who were so important for the Jewish 
population and for Palestine.
Around the end of May, 1944, it became obvious to all of us that the so-called 
Kasztner-group would not leave the country soon, or if it set off its way would 
not go through Romania and the destination would not be Palestine. We also 
understood that this kind of action would not lead to the rescue of great masses 
of Jews from the clutch of Germans and of the Arrow Cross. We had to find new 
ways for rescuing Jewish people without delay. Deportations in the country were 
already going on, and we already had testimonies regarding the dismay of 
Auschwitz, thanks to a few Polish and Slovakian chalucs who had successfully 
escaped. Therefore Krauszs proposal regarding the awakening of the public 
opinion abroad as our most urgent duty was evident. He collected data concerning 
deportations in Hungary with details of all the misery involved and attached to 
them to the testimonies regarding Auschwitz. He sent these documents to various 
Swiss Embassies and had them delivered to the US, to England and to the Pope. He 
asked these governments to put pressure on the Nazi government to stop this 
horror and to intervene in the interest of the emigration of the Jews who 
remained still in Hungary. This was carried to abroad - thanks to consul Lutz  
by a Swiss courier, and the results followed surprisingly fast. These data and 
testimonies got to Roosevelt, Churchill, and the Pope as we learnt from Swiss 
journals sent to us a few weeks later. (Some journals published our material 
word by word, like the Neue Züricher Zeitung on the deportation from 
Nyíregyháza.) The three governments commandingly intervened, and this reached 
the Hungarian government June the 17th. When in the following few weeks 
negotiations between the Swiss Embassy and the Hungarian government still did 
not have any result this intervention was forcefully reasserted. (By the great 
bombings of June and in particular of July.)
The commanding ultimatum addressing the Hungarian government was mediated by the 
Swiss government. Consul Lutz received a long dispatch in which his government 
certified to have received our material and instructed him to personally deliver 
the aforementioned forceful letter of intervention from the part of the great 
political powers. Several of us were present when he asked for an urgent 
audience from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs on the phone. And when the deputy 
minister asked something we could not hear he forcefully answered: No, Sir, 
exceptionally it regards not my government. I want to pass on information coming 
from the American government.
Consul Lutzs intervention in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs did not meet 
considerable resistance. There were some people also there who could observe the 
state of affairs objectively and took forthcoming events into consideration. 
However, they emphasised that this case did not depend on the Hungarian 
government but on the Germans.
But it appeared that similar actions had their effects also in Berlin. A few 
days later, a new dispatch came from Switzerland in which the Swiss government 
instructed Lutz to get prepared for the negotiations and start preparing the 
emigration since German Foreign Ministry in principle had given its consent. 
Already the day after the Hungarian government invited consul Lutz for an 
audience. Early in the morning a meeting started in the Ministry of the Interior 
which lasted until late afternoon, where only the head of the Palestine Office, 
Miklós Krausz was invited on behalf of the Jews. Almost all ministries together 
and also the National Central Authority for Controlling Foreigners were 
represented on this meeting, where the German ambassadors deputy appeared as 
well. The infamous gendarme Lieutenant Colonel Ferenczy was also invited, 
probably as a known expert of transports.

The foreign ministers deputy officially confirmed that the German Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs had approved the emigration of those who had a certificate. 
Further, he announced the decision of the Hungarian government to halt 
deportations and labour service conscriptions till the alia was not concluded 
(till the 31st of August). Later, the number of emigrants and details of their 
travel were discussed. 

The idea of protected houses - as places where the people who intended to alia 
could be gathered - was first raised on this meeting. 

The story of "Vadász-Street" started here. We moved into the building in the 
middle of July. Collective passport and the Schutzpass that resulted from it 
were made here. Next to the 60-80,000 people saved by having a Schutzpass, this 
place gave asylum to 2,600 Jews, amongst them great masses of the Zionist youth, 
who organised and led illegal and underground actions. 

To be loyal to historical truth I also need to mention that among the protected 
people of Vadász Street there were quite a number of non-Jew leftists together 
with their numerous relatives. An evening in December, I witnessed how three 
women blue from the cold asked for asylum at least for a night at the gate 
claiming to have been relatives of hunted leftists. As several people of the 
leftist fraction confirmed their identity they were let in and it was only 
natural that no one asked them later to leave. 

We should not be surprised therefore that the terrorist attempts on the banquet 
of the Arrow Cross in the city theatre were claimed to have originated from 
Vadász Street. This was followed by the gendarmes raid the 4th of December at 
daybreak, which commenced with a long series of shots in the street, and men 
with the sickle-feather appeared on the roofs. Luckily, the main entrance to the 
street was well barred so they could not get in. The head of the gendarmes 
squad started a long debate and negotiation with our leaders  in particular 
with Artúr Weisz. The commander warned us that he would got the house searched 
by his own men unless we handed over the terrorists who attacked the City 
Theatre and all the available weapons. Although we did not know the men they 
wanted we did know about weapons. We started an endless number of telephone 
calls calling the Ministry of the Interior, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the 
city military headquarters and other places. Finally, we achieved that around 
noon the gendarmes temporarily left, but we could not foresee when we would meet 
them again. Although gendarmes did not return it became obvious that we would 
not be spared trouble.
 
A sign of this was the visit of two detectives from the so-called National 
Committee of for Calling to Account one morning in Vadász Street. Their visit 
regarded again forged Schutzpasses but they were also deeply interested in the 
huge mass of people accommodated in the building. They did not hide their 
opinion that the whole building of the Embassy was just a great hiding place, 
and told us that they were going to give their report directly to the leading 
brother of the nation and we could hope for great clearing actions against us 
in the forthcoming days.   

At the same time our agents frequently reported that the Arrow Cross of the 
Garrison Albrecht was getting prepared for an action against Vadász Street. 
The first reports were quite fantastic. According to these the project was to 
lead us into the caves of Pálvölgy and then to kill us with grenades. Later, we 
heard about only the killing. Hence, it was not a great surprise for our 
leaders when a squad of the Arrow Cross entered the building shooting around 
with their machineguns and throwing grenades the 31st of December. This break-in 
resulted in the death of three and in 17 injuries and it was a fortune that we 
could save the people drove out of the house to the street of being taken away 
using our rapports to the city military headquarters and to the police 
headquarters. This way we particularly upset the Arrow Cross squad and this led 
to the capture of Artúr Weisz, a heroic figure and comrade, the day after.

After this event, the bandits of the Arrow Cross broke in regularly. It is hard 
to tell how we could have saved the gathered mass if we had not been liberated 
January the 18th.