The person in question has given us the following information:

On the 10th of May 1944, a detective appeared in my flat and told me to go to 
Svábhegy to testify in a case. Of course this detective reassured me with a 
smile that it was all nothing and I would be back home the same day. There was 
no interrogation for two days. When finally I was interrogated, they asked me 
whether I had participated in a certain excursion. I found out that some members 
of the company with whom I had indeed been on an excursion had been arrested, 
and I myself was also suspected. After the interrogation, saying that they would 
take me home  they took me into Rökk Szilárd street. Of course I never made it 
home, I was incarcerated in Rökk Szilárd Street for a month. Around the 12th of 
June, I was taken into a camp for the sick in Szabolcs Street, where I could 
work as a doctor. This camp was emptied soon afterwards and I was again taken 
back into Rökk Szilárd Street. The next day, I was entrained at Keleti railway 
station, I ended up in Kistarcsa, from where I was taken to Auschwitz three days 
later.

I arrived in Auschwitz on the 17th of June 1944. People were sorted out already 
at the station. Men and women had to stand separately. Old people and children 
were separated from men. In the baths, which was a huge building, we had to get 
completely naked. We could only keep our shoes and glasses. They shaved our hair 
off also on our bodies. We were standing there naked for hours till finally we 
had a bath and were disinfected. We got rags in return for our clothes. They did 
not even check what size of clothing would fit each person. They gave long, 
baggy dresses for small people and vice versa. There were some who could parade 
in evening dresses  Soup, toothbrush, towel? What for?

I got into Camp C, which was a transport camp. I worked here for two and a half 
months as a doctor, therefore my rations were somewhat better than those of 
simple bunk dweller. It was already a great thing that I did not have to sleep 
on a bunk made for ca. 5 people with twelve, thirteen or fourteen other people. 
In Camp C I saw many, very many selections.

It was awfully difficult to be a doctor in Auschwitz. I did not work in the 
hospital, I was a block doctor. It was very difficult, for example, to hide 
infectious patients. If one of two siblings finally had to be taken to hospital, 
this could mean that they would never see each other again. The SS particularly 
enjoyed separating people who belonged together.

I saw Dr Mengele a number of times in the hospital, where they controlled day by 
day whether patients were treated alright, whether they had enough food. The 
next day it could happen that with a wave of his hand while whistling he sent 
the person into the gas chamber about whose health he had been the most anxious 
the day before. On these occasions he was even more horrible than when he 
brutally kicked someone or pulled out his pistol. The doctors working in the 
hospital told me that once a sick young girl managed to commit suicide. She may 
have been less then 20, the miserable creature. When they told this to Mengele, 
to whom the number of patients had to be reported every day of course, he was 
startled and said with an expression of surprise on his face: Selbstmord? Warum 
denn So jung

After two months, from Camp C I went to F.K.L. (Camp A), as a Verfügbar. I 
worked for seven weeks in commissions outside the camp. A transport of labourers 
left for Sachsenhausen, I was assigned there as doctor. I was in Sachenhausen 
for only one day before we carried on towards Berlin-Reinickensdorf, and from 
there with a small Arbeitskommando to nearby Schönholz. I was the doctor of the 
transport for two and a half months.

On the 17th of February 1945, I got into Ravensbrück as a patient. I saw many 
selections here, too. Unfortunately, they had already gas here as well. For when 
Auschwitz ceased to exist as such, the leader and specialist of the local 
crematorium came to Ravensbrück to introduce the gas system there. As far as I 
know, in Ravensbrück they had used poison before.

On the 29th of April 1945, they were driving and hurrying us from the 
approaching Russians for 2 days. I managed to escape on the road and hid in a 
wood, where the liberating Russian troops found me. After my liberation I worked 
for a while as a doctor in the hospital in Neustrelitz.

As an interesting point, I would like to mention that at the Berlin 
Reinickensdorf Arbeitskommando only a certain percentage of the people were 
allowed to be ill. They would always ask how come so many Jews were ill, after 
all, the Germans also had very little to eat.