The person in question has given us the following information:

I come from a well-off middle class family. In October 1942, I was called up for 
company 9/1 in Galánta. The 25th of December, I was transferred to the company 
5/1 in Orgovány, where we worked restoring a fortress. Officers and privates 
were all quite decent people, food and treatment was ok. In July 1943, I arrived 
in Bor. We left with Colonel Balogh and could not complain till he was there. At 
Christmas, Lieutenant Colonel  Marányi replaced him and it was hell afterwards. 
There were two workplaces in Bor; these were called "Tagebau" and "Stollenbau." 
Work was very difficult in both places. The provisions they bought from Germans 
were excellent but they stole 90% of them. When Lieutenant Colonel Marányi 
arrived privates turned into real terrorists. They mercilessly trussed people 
up: they would tie 50 people up at a time and often for 20 hours. Once, ten boys 
escaped but unfortunately were captured. They executed two of them and gave life 
sentence to the rest. Before evacuation, these people were also executed. The 
greatest assassin was Marányi. Everything happened according to his intentions, 
while he left us at the whim of privates. Corporal Horváth, and 2nd Lieutenant 
Lacó were the nastiest, together with Corporal Sisak. Among officers Lieutenant 
Pataki and Cadet Sergeant Tan were the greatest criminals. There was only one 
decent fellow among them: Sergeant Török (a butcher of Kolozsvár). In both 
workplaces we worked day and night guarded by Todt squads. Our managers 
appreciated our work and treated us as comrades while in our sleeping place 
Hungarian privates played their cruel games, so we preferred not to have free 
Sundays, and even begged them to let us work.
When in September 1944, Russians invaded Bulgaria we stopped working and had to 
evacuate the place. Germans gave us very little provisions for the trip, whereas 
Serbian population, as a kind of protest, received us gently and gave us much 
food. When we were marching through Serbian territories Hungarian privates did 
not dare to touch us, while in Romania German militiamen joined us who executed 
8-10 people 10 kilometres away from the Hungarian border. We crossed Hungarian 
border at Titel. We were chased towards Újvidék without any food and suffered 
cruel beatings. They put us up in the building of a factory for two and a half 
days without any food. We set off but not even the officers knew where were 
heading. On the way we were begging for food, and in several places Hungarian 
population gave us some. Finally, we arrived to Cservenka, where the Hungarian 
command handed us over to the Serbian SS. They led a part of the people on an 
attic and another part, around 500 people in the courtyard of the brick factory, 
whom they later executed. We carried on in groups of 500. We had to march with 
heads bent down; who did not obey this order got a blow with the butt on the 
head. Anytime we crossed an ethnic German village locals helped them in 
torturing and beating us while the SS killed boys shooting in the back of the 
neck from behind. Naturally, eating was out of the question. During a rest they 
made 19 men dig their own graves before they executed them. We marched till 
Baja, and everyone was already exhausted. Most of them started walking barefoot 
already in Southern Serbia. We heard that in Baja Hungarians would take charge 
of us again. They put us up in a Jewish cemetery and we thought that at least we 
would die in a nice place, as we were unable to move on. Suddenly a Hungarian 
colonel appeared and took us over in the name of the Hungarian army. The same 
night, we went to an island on the Danube at Baja, where locals received us 
shocked and moved. Non-Jewish population of Baja brought us food and clothes. 
Authorities promised to immediately dismiss us and to take legal action against 
our former officers. We set off towards Szentkirályszabadja, where we were 
supposed to be dismissed. Before we were entrained we heard that there had been 
a separate peace treaty made. It happened the 15th of October: while we were on 
the way Szálasi took power with a coup. As a consequence we rejoined our 
murderous officers led by Lieutenant Colonel Marányi. There were awful 
conditions here both regarding treatment and ration. I got into the infirmary, 
where the doctor, who was a very liberal person, wanted to send to authorities a 
most shocking report on my health, but it did not materialise. We heard that we 
were going to go to Ercsi. As a person unfit for work I was left behind. A week 
later, 800 of us set off. We went all the way to Hegyeshalom on foot. The way 
Hungarian privates behaved was horrible: they came up with and carried out the 
most incredible brutalities. We were in a terrible condition. People were so 
weak that one dragged the other along the dusty road. This is how we got to the 
German border, where Germans entrained us. We got on proper passengers 
carriages, and received quite a nice portion of food.
The 5th of November, we arrived in Oranienburg. They wanted to undress us but 
there was not much to take off: we were barefoot, in rags, full of lice. Around 
30 of my comrades died at the bath because of exhaustion. After the bath they 
put all of us into quarantine for six weeks. Those who recovered their energies 
were transferred into other camps. Those who remained worked for Henkel Aircraft 
Company. Work was not difficult and rations were tolerable, at least at the 
beginning, but we suffered a lot of the cold. There was no crematorium, people 
were not shot, and prisoners organised themselves. Later, I got into hospital 
again because of diarrhoea. In the middle of March, we stopped working and were 
moved to Sachsenhausen.
The situation was the same here as in Oranienburg with the difference that the 
sick did not need to work here. I stayed till Russians approached us. Towards 
the end, conditions deteriorated, by the end we hardly got anything to eat. The 
camp was evacuated the 25th of April. I left with a loaf of bread but there were 
people who had nothing to eat. We headed towards Lübeck: there were around 
25,000 people together with the other camps. At the beginning they shot those 
who fell behind. After three days of walk Germans let the vehicles of the Swiss 
Red Cross meet us in a forest. They carried American Red Cross supplies for us. 
The sick were carried away; they claimed the destination was Sweden. I collapsed 
of weakness and was waiting to be carried away by a vehicle of the Red Cross but 
they had no more space, however we got ample food. Finally, two men and me 
escaped on one of the cars and went backwards to a distance of around 5 
kilometres. We hid in an abandoned German house and waited for the arrival of 
Russian troops for two days. When we were liberated two of us got into a Russian 
hospital, where I spent eight weeks. As I did not have much hope to find any 
member of my family in Hungary alive I did not rush home when I recovered but 
joined a French transport and went to Paris. An uncle of mine lives in Paris, 
and this gave a sort of objective to this trip. Paris was quite a paradise for 
deported people: we got food, clothes; they provided us accommodation, and 
organised our holiday in the most elegant seaside resorts. Despite good and 
tranquil life I lost patience and wanted to get back home as soon as possible, 
so I set off. I arrived in Budapest the 28th of October.
My future plans: Thank God I found the whole family alive. I am a French 
university student, and now, I will also apply for the university in Budapest.