The persons in question have given us the following information:

 (R.S.) The Jewish Laws affected me in as much as they withdrew my 
fathers trade licence for the wholesale of coal in 1941. Nor 
could my husband obtain any kind of trade licence. In 1942, my 
husband was called up for labour service, and for a year and a 
half he stayed in Hungary but in July 1943, he was deported to 
Serbia, from where he has never returned home. 

 (W.E.) My fathers shop was also seized because of Jewish Laws. 
Later, they also died. When in March 1944, the Germans invaded 
Hungary, a number of decrees started to come out: about yellow 
stars, moving together, etc. During the night of Peter and Paul 
policemen came to fetch us, and the following day gendarmes seized 
our flat. Gendarmes behaved in a disgusting way; they were rude 
and nasty.

From the railway station of Kispest they took us to Monor. There 
were around 100 of us in a freight car so we could hardly move. We 
brought food with us.

We got off at Monor and went to the brick factory escorted by 
policemen. Gendarmes kept shouting at us. They were rude and said 
antisemitic things on the way. An elderly woman was unable to 
carry her luggage so they took it, smashed it to the floor and 
told her to leave it there. They had already seized our valuables 
in Kispest and let us bring only a few clothes. Most of the non-
Jewish population of Kispest was happy about our humiliation; only 
a small group was against it.

 As I have said, we were lined up in fives and were escorted to 
the brick factory with a strict military escort in Monor. This was 
a difficult walk for elderly people and for people not accustomed 
to soldiers. We lived mostly in the open, while there was neither 
water nor a latrine. From time to time we had heavy rains so we 
lived under awful conditions. All of us were glad when we learnt 
that we would carry on because living conditions were unbearable 
here.

 During entrainment at the railway station of Monor gendarmes were 
again rude and terrible. They wanted to put me in a separate 
wagon, separated from my parents (R.S.), and I protested. They 
ignored my protest, and we had a loud fight but without any 
results for us. They separated me from my parents, but I could 
sneak over to their place later. More than once, I saw them 
beating elderly people. There were around 100 people in a freight 
car. They locked the door of the car immediately, so the heat was 
unbearable and people were suffocating. They did not give us water 
during the entire journey despite our pleadings. They did not 
secure us food either.

 The doors of the cars remained closed till the German border. 
When Germans took charge of us in Kassa they did not fully close 
the door, which was a great pleasure for us.

 The 10th of June, we arrived in Auschwitz. When we got off the 
train, men and women were separated. Women were sorted out and 
presumably also men. They separated me from my mother and led me 
into the baths. They seized our clothes, cut our hair off, 
disinfected us and gave us ragged clothes. We got into Camp B.III, 
where there was not even a berth or a cover, and from time to time 
rain fell in. There were times when we stood in the room for three 
consecutive days since the floor was full of water, so we stood 
there for three days and nights in heavy rain.

 We woke up at 2-3 am at dawn and stood there lined up for roll 
call till the morning. All that we did was line up for roll calls. 
All of us got became inert, and it is almost certain that they 
mixed some bromide medicine in the food. We thought we felt its 
smell. Provisions were anyhow horrible, quite inedible, so in the 
beginning we could eat only a few hundred grams of bread a day.

 They kept telling us that we were not to fall sick, and had to 
precisely keep to the rules of roll calls, because these were some 
sacred happenings and whoever disrespected them or fell sick was 
going to finish in the gas chamber. At the beginning we did not 
take these warnings seriously. Nevertheless, we could sometimes 
smell a very strange smell in the air, something that was similar 
to the smell of burnt wool, and we also saw during the nights a 
big fire not far from the camp. Some nights we heard loud screams 
coming from one of the camps. Now, we already believed what we 
tried not to admit even to ourselves at the beginning.

 The Camp was full of German SS-men and SS-women. We noticed that 
most of them understood Hungarian. These women were also very rude 
and terrible with us, generally much worse than German men. They 
would beat us, kick us and shove us for any trifle. In general, 
conditions were so extreme that everyone was happy to leave 
Auschwitz behind. Selections were every day and one could not tell 
where selected people would end up. Were they going to work or get 
to another place? Dr Mengele did the selections. We had to stay 
naked in the yard while people from the SS were walking up and 
down laughing at us.

 We spent three weeks in Auschwitz before they selected us for a 
transport. We got clothes and shoes and travelled in carriages to 
a little village called Peterswaldau in Lower Silesia. 30 of us 
lived in the factory called Hansefabrik and we also worked there 
doing the job needed in a weaving mill. Our situation was fairly 
good although the work was hard. Naturally, Germans were 
prohibited to talk with us and we were guarded by Aufseherins. The 
quality of rations was good but the quantity was terribly small, 
especially if one considers that we had a difficult physical job 
to do.

 At the end of February, we were evacuated. We went to Paslitz on 
foot, which was around 120 kilometres away. The way through the 
mountains of Aulengebirg was horrible. We walked in bad shoes in 
snowstorms, in rain, snow, and cold; and we had no lodging. I 
still wonder how we managed to make it.

 When we arrived in Paslitz, we were lodged in a camp. Originally, 
it was meant to be a transit camp but we remained here for three 
weeks. It was an awfully squalid, disgusting place full of lice 
and without any lighting. Rations were minimal, hardly enough to 
keep us alive. We starved incredibly.

Generally, SS-women were very wild and rude. Several times the 
Oberscharführer kicked young girls in front of our eyes.

 They sent us to dig trenches. Food was so scarce that even the 
men of Organization Todt were indignant at seeing our rations. 
Conditions were so terrible here that women who had spent here a 
longer time were now bags of bones.

 They did everything in order to make our lives more difficult. 
One day, they took all our clothes on the pretext of disinfecting 
us and we had to spend a day and a half without any clothes in the 
cold hut. The Oberscharführer of the place seized the blankets 
that the factory owner in Peterswaldau had given us as presents, 
so we had to use our thin coats as covers. When it rained we had 
to cover ourselves with wet coats.

 The 2nd of April, a German officer of the camp selected us and we 
were transported to Görlitz in open wagons.

 In Görlitz we had to dig trenches. We walked 16 kilometres a day 
to the workplace and did some quite difficult physical jobs while 
our supervisors kept shooting. The camp was clean but rations were 
terribly meagre. At the beginning six people shared a loaf of 
bread, later ten. For lunch we got a litre of soup cooked either 
of turnips or of beetroots without salt and grease. We starved a 
lot and did not know when our suffering would end. 

 The 6th of May, the leaders of the camp ran away. Earlier, they 
wanted to take us as well but we did not go with them. They left 
us there without any food because they had taken everything. We 
were reduced to begging for food. Russians arrived the 8th of May, 
and we were liberated.

These were our own experiences.