The person in question has given us the following information:

The 3rd of June, 1942, I was called up for labour service in Aszód. They put 
together a company and we left for Bástyaháza, where we built an airport. Both 
the commander and the privates had good manners in this period. We could have 
contact with locals partly in secret, partly openly. It always depended on 
privates. Locals were very nice, and as Jews had been not taken away yet, we 
went to see Ruthenian Jewish families, who were glad to meet us and supported 
us. We stayed here till the 5th of January, when we were taken back to Aszód, 
and could go home for the winter, that is, for two months. The 1st of March, we 
was called up once again for service in Aszód, which was an administrative 
centre, and from where they sent us to Esztergom.  
Esztergom was like a holiday resort, 100 times better than our earlier 
workplace. Our commander, police Captain Kis improved our rations, gave us a day 
off every week and did not rush us very much at work. We stayed here till 
Germans invaded the country in 1944, or more precisely, even longer, but the 
times that followed should be viewed separately since our commander and the 
privates were replaced. The new commander was a degenerate warrant officer. He 
was coming from a poor family, so ee tried everything to win his favour: once we 
got hold of a chicken, grilled it and gave it to him. He turned his nose up and 
declared that he did not need bad food; he shoved it back and said we should eat 
it. This was the person who led us to the front around the middle of May. The 
fact that we departed was quite silly in the first place, since we had not been 
sent there but he drove us there out of zeal. 
We went to Nadworna, where they neither expected us nor counted on us. We stayed 
there puzzled because in the lack of commission you could not do much. We had no 
place to sleep, no food to eat, and were in quite a desperate situation. Out 
there they did not know what to do with us, why we came, what we were looking 
for. To put things to rights our dear commander had to urgently look for a 
company that was ready to accept us. This is how we became part of the sapper 
company of Baja. The minute we joined them our life changed. As a self-
presentation sappers seized all our valuables. If you obeyed their order at once 
they did it quietly, if not, they also beat you up. They would truss people up 
and make us work hard. We worked in the Carpathian Mountains digging trenches. 
If the finished work did not satisfy them they would make 50-60 people, who 
worked on the same field, line up, and would beat them up. Luckily, these 
sappers were soon replaced while we were transferred to a battalion from Pest, 
where they treated us much better. 
When at Koloma Russians started to powerfully attack I went up into the 
Carpathian Mountains with 19 comrades to wait there for Russians arrival. We 
had weapons, the weapons that retreating Hungarian troops discarded. In the 
mountains we had some minor clashes with Ukrainians who were friends of Germans. 
We could luckily defeat them with our arms. These were formal little battles. 
This is how we became Partisans - unintentionally! There had been projects for 
escape in our company already before, now we tried to get into contact with real 
partisans. However, we could not manage because we did not know who were 
trustworthy, who were partisans you could trust, on whose support you could 
count, and who could in return rely on you. It was difficult to find partisans 
since we could not differentiate between partisans and Ukrainian bandits. 
However, we got prepared for the hiding. We had bought lard from the locals and 
cans from Hungarians. We had given money, gold if we still had; we had put all 
eggs in one basket. In this period there were three privates with us. A new rule 
declared that Jews could not get sugar, cigarettes, and fats. I told the lance 
sergeant that we could not work if we did not get these rations. He said we 
should escape if we did not like it. So you could also do that? We followed his 
advice. They suspected what we were up to, but ignored it. 
When we had already done a bit of partisanship up in the mountains we thought 
that the Russian army must have already advanced and reached the valley. We 
climbed off and as we expected we met Russian troops. We reported and they 
offered us cigarettes, chocolate  we stayed with them till the morning. They 
took us to headquarters where they told us to start walking in the direction of 
Inner Russia. However, I wanted to be a prisoner by force, so a Russian Jewish 
Lance Sergeant showed us where we had to go. We went to Visnyowin, where there 
was a camp, and from where they sent us to Izaszlaw, in quarantine. Finally, we 
ended up in Zaporozhe. First, we did building constructions, later we loaded 
ships. 
Now we have returned home because of sickness.