The person in question has given us the following information:

On the 10th of November, 1944, Arrow Cross men gathered the younger inhabitants 
of the house  including me and took us to the Óbuda brick factory. Here two 
days rushed by in horrible conditions: it was raining all the time, we were 
given no food, we only ate whatever we could pack at home in 10 minutes. Back 
then we did not even miss food, because we were worn out with anxiety and fear 
and had no appetite. On the third day, we left towards an uncertain future. 
During the journey we slept in barns, but we would very often spend the night 
also in the open. We were accompanied by members of the national guard, they 
shot dead whoever could not keep up with the rest. We arrived in Koppháza 
through Süt?, Piliscsaba and Dorog. Here we were digging trenches for four 
weeks, we slept in barns and the work was tiring. Provisions were meagre: coffee 
in the morning, later some watery soup and 250 grams of bread, which did not 
improve our condition  we were often cold and treatment was becoming worse and 
On the 10th of November, 1944, Arrow Cross men gathered the younger inhabitants 
of the house  including me and took us to the Óbuda brick factory. Here two 
days rushed by in horrible conditions: it was raining all the time, we were 
given no food, we only ate whatever we could pack at home in 10 minutes. Back 
then we did not even miss food, because we were worn out with anxiety and fear 
and had no appetite. On the third day, we left towards an uncertain future. 
During the journey we slept in barns, but we would very often spend the night 
also in the open. We were accompanied by members of the national guard, they 
shot dead whoever could not keep up with the rest. We arrived in Koppháza 
through Süt?, Piliscsaba and Dorog. Here we were digging trenches for four 
weeks, we slept in barns and the work was tiring. Provisions were meagre: coffee 
in the morning, later some watery soup and 250 grams of bread, which did not 
improve our condition  we were often cold and treatment was becoming worse and 
worse. Peasants showed no sympathy towards us. One morning they made us depart 
and the marching commenced again all the way to Zündorf. Here we were entrained 
and 2 days later we arrived in Lichtenwörth. We had no food for the journey. 80 
of us were jammed into a freight car, and our only hope was that upon arrival we 
would be able to wash properly. This, however, did not come true. The camp was 
horribly dirty, we suffered from lack of water, and we were full of lice after a 
few days. Our daily portion was soup, coffee and 80 grams of bread. We did not 
work at all. The block in which I lived was overcrowded; therefore, quarrels 
were frequent. The SS supervisor women were beating us all the time. Many people 
died of hunger and typhus, but diphtheria also took its toll. Days and weeks 
passed by, my best friend died next to me and I had to watch her swift passing 
helplessly. On the 2nd of April, 1945, the Russians liberated us to my utmost 
pleasure. I got as far as Szombathely, where I got typhus, and I spent four 
weeks in hospital before I arrived home.