The person in question has given us the following information:

My husband was a bus contractor, and financially we had no particular problems 
until Germans came into the country in the spring of 1944, and the ghetto was 
set up a few days after Easter. We lived in ghetto till the 18th of May, when we 
were entrained and we started off. On the way no one died in our freight car and 
I cannot remember anyone trying to escape. Military gendarmes guarded us till 
Kassa, where the SS took charge of the train. After two days travel, we arrived 
in Auschwitz, where they right away separated me from my family still at the 
station. I was lodged in Camp B, later moved into the Czech camp, and I also 
spent two weeks in Camp C. I worked two months in Brezinka sorting out clothes. 
I worked in different shifts. In the open where they distributed lunch for us I 
often saw transports, especially elderly people and women with little children 
passing by. Supplies were somewhat better here than in other parts of the camp, 
because we had more access to food since we often found some food in the luggage 
but the horrible images that we saw day after day at the Brezinka station 
spoiled our appetite a great deal. We often saw when they carried the so-called 
Muslims by car. Two months later I got into a weaving mill, where I worked 
till the end of December. Later, I got into hospital and stayed there till the 
end. In the meantime, Russians liberated the camp the 27th of January. Under 
German rule we starved much in the hospital but it naturally changed in the 
Russian period. Until May, I kept wandering from one place to another in Poland, 
when finally I came home, more precisely to Budapest with a Czech transport.

Future plans: Going home!