The person in question has given us the following information:

When we arrived in Auschwitz, we were right away separated from 
the elderly, the sick, and children. The people who were fit for 
work  and I was selected among them  were led to the baths. Here 
we had to completely undress. They cut our hair, we had a shower 
and everyone received some ragged, lousy garment and a pair of 
mismatched shoes. They seized all the belongings we had. They led 
us into a block. There were around 1,000 people lodged in a block. 
We lay on bunk beds without straw mattresses. A bunk like this had 
been designed for four people but fourteen of us lay on it with a 
single cover. These beds were above one another and since they 
were overloaded they frequently fell off and injured the people 
who lay underneath. Even rain fell in our block. The day when we 
arrived we got nothing to eat. The following day we received some 
soup, although six of us had to eat from the same pot without 
spoons. We were not allowed to wash or leave the block. All that 
we did during the day was line up for roll calls. Everyday, in 
rain, in cold, in mud, in a piece of ragged garment we stood there 
from the morning till the evening. Every third week they brought 
us into the disinfecting building where they exchanged our ragged 
clothes for other dirty ones.
Several kinds of news spread about those who had been separated 
from us on arrival but we could not decide what was true among 
them. Once a Slovak girl who I knew told me that unfortunately our 
relatives were taken directly into a gas chamber and were burnt 
right after they had been separated from us. Later, I could also 
see that fire was burning in the crematorium day and night and 
column of flames came out the top of the chimney. 
Sometimes they did the selections every day, sometimes only every 
week. They selected the sick and the weak but it also happened 
that they selected also the pretty ones and all of them went to 
the crematorium. 
Dr Mengele, and SS women Drechsler, Ruppert, Grese  who was 
hanged already before the end  and Mandelne did the selections.
I spent two months in Camp C but we did not work at all. We were 
then transferred into Camp B, and they immediately made us part of 
an Aussenkommando, and we dug trenches. In January, we were 
evacuated. We started the trip on foot and continued in open 
wagons after a few days of walk. There were 120 of us crammed into 
a wagon, so we could not even move. During the whole journey we 
got no food at all. On the 24th of January we arrived in 
Ravensbrück. On the day we arrived they let us stand in high snow 
until the evening, when they eventually herded our group of 1,500 
people into a tent. There were so many corpses here that we could 
not avoid walking over them. Besides, the tent was full of water. 
There was no one responsible for collecting the corpses. We got 
terribly little food; and we did not work. People were selected 
for transports all the time. Four weeks later, I was also selected 
for a transport and was carried to Neustadt-Gleve. It was not 
obligatory to work here but if you worked you got more bread and 
since we had already starved a lot we preferred to volunteer for 
work. The block where we were lodged was fine; four of us lay in a 
small bed and each of us had a cover. Treatment was bearable, too, 
since they saw that we were close to being finished and cared 
little about us.
The Americans liberated us on the 3rd of May. The SS ran away 
already before the Americans arrived.
My next goal is to get to Palestine as soon as possible.