The person in question has given us the following information:

 We arrived in Auschwitz on a Saturday morning. As soon as we got 
off, train selections started. It meant that men and women had to 
stand apart, and in each group they selected the elderly, the weak 
and children and put them in a common group, and formed a separate 
group of people fit for work. I was also put in this latter group 
together with my two elder sisters. They led us to the baths, 
where they cut our hair off, seized all our belongings, and after 
the baths everyone got a long dress with a red stripe on the back. 
We marched into block 28 of Camp 0. For two days we got nothing 
but tea. Later, we got the regular camp rations, which meant a tea 
in the morning, a plate of soup at noon (made of inedible grasses) 
and 200 grams of bread and some Zulag distributed during the roll 
call of the afternoon.
In the block, 13 of us slept on a bunk. In the beginning we had no 
blankets, later the 13 of us shared two blankets. Every morning at 
4 am we were already lined up for roll call, which lasted for 4-5 
hours even if it was pouring cold rain. In the afternoon, roll 
call started at 1:30 and lasted until dusk. We did not work at 
all.
 Great selections started in the autumn. Every day thousands of 
people were carried into the gas chambers. During these selections 
we had to undress completely and passed in front of a doctor with 
our arms raised. The doctor was called Dr Mengele, who selected 
the weak, the old and the sick and sent them to the gas chamber 
while he was whistling. However, there were also selections when 
they picked the healthy to send them to work. Once, I was also 
selected among the healthy and in pouring rain, they took me from 
Camp 0 into the F.K.L., and from there into the baths, where we 
got new clothes and shoes. Later, they gave everyone provisions 
for three days and we got on a train. When we got on, 
Oberaufseherin Drechsler made sure that 50 people got in each 
carriage and that brothers and sisters did not stay together. We 
arrived in Schlesiensee the following day, where they handed us 
over to the Wehrmacht. 2,000 of us arrived here and we were lodged 
in two neighbouring camps on a farm. We all got plates already at 
the beginning, and were treated in quite a different (better) way. 
Our Kommandant was a 50-year-old man called Robert Jeschke (a 
German man), who never insulted us. My elder sister and I were his 
orderlies. The others prepared trenches. They worked also in the 
greatest cold in the open from early morning till dusk.
When the front got closer to us, at 10 pm we received the command 
to carry on. We were organised into companies and made great 
efforts to carry away also the sick partly in wheelbarrows, partly 
holding them. Unfortunately, already in the first few hours 30 
people died. This was how we walked for weeks in the snow and the 
cold. At the beginning we still had some food but later we could 
not get hold of any because the population fled from everywhere. 
We spent the nights in sheds but could have no rest because very 
many of us were crammed into a shed; some people did not even have 
a place to stand. The people who did not want to carry on were 
shot in the next forest. Their number was around 10-15 a day. 
1,500 of us departed and only 620 of us remained but also many of 
them died in the first days. Now, we were already guarded by the 
SS. We got very little food because the SS had a part of the food 
that was meant for us cooked for themselves. We were lodged here 
in a new camp. There were 350 of us in a barrack. We lay on wet 
straw on the floor. SS-women would beat us with rubber crops 
without any reason. We did not work here either but in any case we 
could not have been able to work since we were like skeletons.
 The 13th of April, on a Friday, we had to leave also this place 
because the front was already very close to us. Our Kommandant was 
a sadist who delighted in our suffering. When we departed, a group 
of (Ukrainian) people who had been in the camp before we arrived 
joined us and together with them there were 1,500 of us. We went 
on foot and starved a lot. For days we lived on raw potato peels, 
and people died one after the other because of hunger. When we 
arrived in Domarslit (a Czech town), and locals got to know who we 
were they started throwing out of the windows whatever food they 
had, ignoring the threats of the SS. We kept on marching until we 
arrived in Prachatjice, where only 149 of us arrived out of 1,500 
people. The rest were either shot or starved to death or ran away. 
Since the frontline was so close to here that we could not 
proceed, they led us into a dense forest at the border of the 
Sudeten mountains, and everyone was prepared to die. However, we 
were astonished to see that apart from hearing two shots nothing 
happened. We were left on our own because the SS ran away. 
However, we realised it only in the morning although we spent the 
night awake in the open poured by rain. In the morning, we all 
went into different directions towards Czech villages. With nine 
others I went to a village called Hajek. When locals learnt that 
we were Czechs they put us up and gave us all the good things. On 
the third day of our stay in the village Americans arrived and 
that was how we got fully liberated.
 My plan for the future is to get to Palestine as soon as 
possible.