The persons in question have given us the following information:

I left Munkács with the first transport. At first, for four weeks 
we did not work in Auschwitz but later they selected me into the 
group of women with white scarves to work in Brezinka. Our job 
was to sort out and pack the clothes of the people who arrived 
with transports. Work in the crematorium happened in front of our 
eyes. We saw how the people unfit for work from the arriving 
transports were carried to the gas chamber, which was disguised as 
baths, and we saw that no one returned alive. It happened also 
that they sent all people of arriving transports to the gas 
chamber without selections. We did not see when they gassed them 
but when we worked on the dismantling of the crematorium we saw 
the devices. In the kommando of women with white scarves there 
were 700 of us. We sabotaged work in a way that we made clothes 
unusable on purpose. The Capo of the kommando was a Slovakian girl 
Manci and a Polish girl called Erna. They talked much about their 
lives in the camp: when they had arrived, there were fields in the 
place of the camp, which they constructed. They had slept on the 
floor and the camp was still full of dirt and lice. 

From Brezinka we were transferred into the weaving mill. There was 
horrible squalor here and a cruel Reichsdeutsch capo, who would 
continuously beat us. I went to work when I was severely sick 
because I did not dare to report sick not to be put in the 
crematorium by chance.

When Auschwitz was evacuated we also had to move on. That was how 
we ended up in Weisswasser /Sudetenland/. This camp was much 
cleaner and more orderly than Auschwitz. Nevertheless, food was 
scarce. We worked for an ammunition factory doing a lot of hard 
work. I worked as a nurse in the hospital. This was a well-kept 
hospital. The patients who died here were buried in the 
crematorium of Gross Rosen. We were always threatened to be taken 
to Gross Rosen in case we made some mistake. As the Russians 
approached the situation got worse. The Lagerführer said we were 
going to die first, and they would only be the second. They 
tortured us incredibly; they did not let us go to the toilet; we 
had to be lined up for roll call for hours; and they invented the 
most diverse punishments for the most trivial offences. The most 
brutal were the SS women. The 6th of May, the SS doctor (Stanek) 
gathered us  he used to behave always malevolently  and said 
they were going to leave and we were free even if the Russians 
were still far away. But if we dared to do anything against the 
evacuation of SS women, he would get all the people of the camp 
executed. They left, and we set off and went into a nearby Czech 
village, where Czech farmers received us in their homes.