The person in question has given us the following information:

Jewish Laws concerned me in so far as I was not allowed to work. I could not 
take a taxi any more, Jews were not allowed to take taxis. After this I went to 
the Dénes and Friedmann company, where I presented my employment record and 
became a technician again. I had to leave this company because I was taken to 
Máriaremete and its surroundings to build artillery stands. 

The people in Budapest  Christians  were unfortunately glad to see us being 
maltreated. It was obvious for me.

We worked in Remete until the 20th of October, when Arrow Cross men took us 
away, and on the 22nd, in Flóra manor near Gödöll?, they seized our watches, 
chains, everything, money, everything we had. We started walking from Flóra 
manor on the 5th of November at night. We arrived at the Óbuda brick factory  
and left it on the 8th. We went through Piliscsaba, Dorog, Sütt? and Sz?ny, 
always on foot, starving, we lived on cornhusks. They gave us a little water 
once a day and we continued our journey with a little bread: Dunaszeg, 
Mosonmagyaróvár, Hegyeshalom. We crossed the border on the 16th of November. We 
were entrained and handed over to the Germans in a small Austrian village. Here 
again Swabian children, who were from Budapest and the nearby villages who were 
dressed in Hitlerjugend uniforms, mugged us. They took away all the food we had, 
also our coats etc. We were entrained, I got into a freight car with 60-70 other 
people. After a long time we got a little bread and water.

On the 19th of November, we arrived in Buchenwald, in a death camp. It was 
raining all the time, they took away our clothes and everything we had, and when 
we were completely naked they dressed us in striped prisoners clothes. Every 
morning, midday and evening we got swill that they called food. A few days 
later, I was sorted out as a craftsman and was taken to Altenburg.

We arrived at the Hasag factory. Hugo Schneider s.g. They produce here 
everything: from pins to stirring spoons. Our situation was better here in the 
sense that we had a roof above our heads in the barracks. We got a little black 
water in the morning, boiled dried turnips and sometimes a little cottage 
cheese, 20-30 grams, for lunch. We worked 12 hours a day, one week at night, 
next week during the day. Many people fell ill, because they could not work this 
much. They were sent out to Altenburg and others were brought instead of them. 
More women died than men. They became invalids, as the machines caught them, 
etc.

When the situation started to become too dangerous for them, we left behind the 
Hasag factory in great hurry. We went to Waldenburg on the 12th of April, 1945.

At Waldenburg, on the 4th, an American Mexican Texan division caught up with 
them. It was a horrible battle. We went up to a hill and watched the final fight 
from there. The Germans tried to shoot, but the Americans were so well equipped 
that if they hit a tank it collapsed. Finally the Germans ran away and we were 
free. We immediately got some milk and chocolate, we were treated very nicely 
and I can only remember the Americans with gratitude because they saved our 
lives.

These have been my own experiences.