The person in question has given us the following information:

Jewish Laws effected me already in 1939. As a Jewish chief accountant of a firm 
I did not get salary raises or promotions and had to face other disadvantages 
all the time.

In 1940, I lost my rank as a corporal candidate with high school degree and I 
was summoned for labour service. From the 7th of September 1940 till the 1st of 
December 1940, I was in Makó as a labour serviceman. The next time I was drafted 
for labour service was on the 29th of May 1942, in Vác, from where they took me 
into Russia in June. I suffered a lot in Russia. The commander of the company 
Károly Székely was a mentally sick, sadistic person, who made us starve all the 
time. Among the privates Ödön Kocsis, Gyula Kozma, Antal Lénárt, and N. Ferenci 
were those who would beat us, tie us, make us starve and steal our food.

A great number of people died because of landmines, our lives were in continuous 
danger. I was also sick for a longer period of time. The sick were not given 
food as they said: the sick should not eat. I sold what I still had and lived 
on it.

In June of 1943, everything changed. The commander and the privates were 
replaced and we lived under tolerable conditions till the time we returned, the 
7th of October.

In May of 1944, I was summoned again to Vác. First, I was sent into 
Transylvania, later into the gorge of Gyimes, to Lovász. Later, we withdrew to 
El?torda, next to Kolozsvár because of the Russian advance. Here we stayed in 
wish Laws effected me already in 1939. As a Jewish chief accountant of a firm I 
did not get salary raises or promotions and had to face other disadvantages all 
the time.

In 1940, I lost my rank as a corporal candidate with high school degree and I 
was summoned for labour service. From the 7th of September 1940 till the 1st of 
December 1940, I was in Makó as a labour serviceman. The next time I was drafted 
for labour service was on the 29th of May 1942, in Vác, from where they took me 
into Russia in June. I suffered a lot in Russia. The commander of the company 
Károly Székely was a mentally sick, sadistic person, who made us starve all the 
time. Among the privates Ödön Kocsis, Gyula Kozma, Antal Lénárt, and N. Ferenci 
were those who would beat us, tie us, make us starve and steal our food.

A great number of people died because of landmines, our lives were in continuous 
danger. I was also sick for a longer period of time. The sick were not given 
food as they said: the sick should not eat. I sold what I still had and lived 
on it.

In June of 1943, everything changed. The commander and the privates were 
replaced and we lived under tolerable conditions till the time we returned, the 
7th of October.

In May of 1944, I was summoned again to Vác. First, I was sent into 
Transylvania, later into the gorge of Gyimes, to Lovász. Later, we withdrew to 
El?torda, next to Kolozsvár because of the Russian advance. Here we stayed in 
the first line for four and a half months because the commander, who was a 
captain of a sapper company, forced us to stay in the trenches exposed to 
constant fire for four and a half months. We did minor works. I got wounded 
while we were extinguishing fire. An exploded mine wounded my leg and my cheek 
next to my eye. A train that carried injured people brought me back and I got 
into garrison hospital No. 11 in Budapest. When I recovered, I was sent back to 
Vác, from where I escaped in the first days of November as the company was to be 
transported into Germany.

I went hiding mostly in Rákospalota in flats of Christian friends, but the Arrow 
Cross took me away as someone had denounced me. For my luck I got denounced as a 
military fugitive. When I was captured there were also a corporal and a lance 
sergeant who came to fetch me, who insisted that the Arrow Cross handed me over 
to them, and thereby they probably saved my life. In Rákospalota the Arrow Cross 
handed me over to the army only after they gave me a hard beating, and grabbed 
all my valuables. They carried me to the barracks of gendarmes, where a decent 
captain did not let the Arrow Cross take me away but had me transferred to the 
police, from where I got into the ghetto of Budapest. They did not place the 
issue on record. A few hours later, I was taken away from the ghetto to Teleki 
Square where I joined a transport that was ready to depart to Bergen-Belsen from 
the railway station of Józsefváros. There were 72 of us in a freight car. 
Hungarians did not give us food or water; Germans did but only 11 days later.

In Bergen-Belsen they put us up in a barrack full of lice where we experienced 
rather miserable weeks. We did not have to work. Accordingly we got very little 
food - as Germans claimed. We became thin and weak.

We had no opportunity to bath and it meant that soon we were also swarming with 
lice in that lousy barrack. Later, different sicknesses spread, and as a result 
of starvation in four months 700 people died out of 4000.

The 7th of April, we had to set off towards Theresienstadt. The 13th of April, 
Americans captured the train and took us under their protection in Hillesleben. 
They did not care much about us, so we had to find food on our own. Later, the 
English arrived. They spoke the language of calories and raised the quantity of 
daily calories above 2000. Germans also got 2000 calories a day. At the 
beginning Americans gave us 1400 calories, which was awfully little after that 
long period of starvation.

These have been my own experiences.