The person in question has given us the following information:

      Around 600 Jews lived in Szerednye. They were mostly craftsmen and 
tradesmen but there were also doctors and lawyers among them. They generally 
lived the life of the middle class. There were neither extremely rich nor 
extremely poor among them. My father was a tailor, we worked and made a decent 
living.
      
      In 1939, they withdrew trade licences, seized shops and houses. These 
statutes were executed by the notary and the gendarmes on an order coming from 
Ungvár. There was fierce antisemitism, people broke windows, if they noticed a 
Jew with a beard they physically insulted him and made the life of all of us 
difficult. But they were glad to grab our money and valuables.
      
      The 24th of April 1944, at 6 am gendarmes went round from house to house 
and gave us two hours to get packed. My father was supposed to make clothes for 
two SS soldiers who went to see the notary and asked him to allow him to stay 
home till he got ready, and to join the others only later. First, they let him 
stay so my mother gave the food to the neighbours, but then the notary did not 
allow us to stay home so we suddenly had to pack and go. We left all our 
belongings home.
      
      There were around 20,000 people crammed into the ghetto as they took all 
Jews of the surrounding area into the ghetto of Ungvár. Insults and plunders 
were normal habit. The police could enter the ghetto while we were not allowed 
to leave it. We got very little food. They kept telling us the story that they 
were going to transport us towards the centre of the country for work. There was 
no way to escape.
      
      The 8th of May, 1944, they entrained us, putting 80 people in a freight 
car. The whole journey was a torture impossible to describe. Jews gave us two 
buckets of water in Ungvár. In Kassa Hungarians handed us over to the German SS, 
and afterwards we got neither water nor food. In Kassa Hungarian gendarmes 
ordered us to hand in the gold or the money we had, then they searched us and 
gave slaps to those who hid something. When they found 500 peng?s on a woman 
they gave her a brutal beating and seized her money.
      
      When we arrived in Auschwitz we noticed that the railway station was full 

      Around 600 Jews lived in Szerednye. They were mostly craftsmen and 
tradesmen but there were also doctors and lawyers among them. They generally 
lived the life of the middle class. There were neither extremely rich nor 
extremely poor among them. My father was a tailor, we worked and made a decent 
living.
      
      In 1939, they withdrew trade licences, seized shops and houses. These 
statutes were executed by the notary and the gendarmes on an order coming from 
Ungvár. There was fierce antisemitism, people broke windows, if they noticed a 
Jew with a beard they physically insulted him and made the life of all of us 
difficult. But they were glad to grab our money and valuables.
      
      The 24th of April 1944, at 6 am gendarmes went round from house to house 
and gave us two hours to get packed. My father was supposed to make clothes for 
two SS soldiers who went to see the notary and asked him to allow him to stay 
home till he got ready, and to join the others only later. First, they let him 
stay so my mother gave the food to the neighbours, but then the notary did not 
allow us to stay home so we suddenly had to pack and go. We left all our 
belongings home.
      
      There were around 20,000 people crammed into the ghetto as they took all 
Jews of the surrounding area into the ghetto of Ungvár. Insults and plunders 
were normal habit. The police could enter the ghetto while we were not allowed 
to leave it. We got very little food. They kept telling us the story that they 
were going to transport us towards the centre of the country for work. There was 
no way to escape.
      
      The 8th of May, 1944, they entrained us, putting 80 people in a freight 
car. The whole journey was a torture impossible to describe. Jews gave us two 
buckets of water in Ungvár. In Kassa Hungarians handed us over to the German SS, 
and afterwards we got neither water nor food. In Kassa Hungarian gendarmes 
ordered us to hand in the gold or the money we had, then they searched us and 
gave slaps to those who hid something. When they found 500 peng?s on a woman 
they gave her a brutal beating and seized her money.
      
      When we arrived in Auschwitz we noticed that the railway station was full 
of luggage, hence, everyone rapidly put on his or her spare underwear or clothes 
to save them. Unfortunately, we could not save anything as they took everything 
we had in the baths where they disinfected us, shaved us and from where they led 
us in ragged clothes into the camp. For two days we got nothing to eat. All we 
had to do was to line up for roll calls. If someone was missing during a roll 
call we had to stay on knees and hold stones in erect hands till they found the 
missing person. Often they found him or her lying dead next to the wires. This 
was the better case, because if they found them alive they would kill them with 
a blow. I stayed in the same camp with my little sister. Luckily, we kept secret 
the fact we were sisters. She fell ill, got diarrhoea, which was a common 
infection in the camp. She could hardly stand on her legs, I had to hold her. I 
was worried she would go to hospital as I was afraid she would not return from 
there. I gave her the extra ration I received so she got a little better after a 
few weeks. 
      
      There were continual selections. We had to pass naked with raised arms in 
front of Dr Mengele. The person he considered thin or weak was immediately taken 
away. Dr Mengele reappeared every week and singled out people while he was 
whistling and singing and watched laughingly how much we were terrified of him. 
Once we saw him giving chocolate and bread to children in a transport before 
they took them into the crematorium. Another time there was an incoming 
transport of 7,000 people, out of whom only 200 were selected for life. We know 
it because these 200 people came to our place and told us.
      
      The so-called Czech-Jewish camp was next to our camp. Selections were also 
going on there. One night crying and screaming woke us up. It was when they 
entirely emptied this camp and took them to the crematorium. Gypsies were 
treated better than we were treated; they did not even cut off their hair. 
      
      I remember when we arrived at Auschwitz and were going towards the baths, 
we saw great flames and heard screaming. Naturally, we asked what had happened, 
what that horrible screaming was. We saw the shadows of people thrown in the 
flames and we were also in terror. They answered that the handicapped were being 
burnt; I commented that they surely burnt children also. As a response, they 
asked why let little children live. We understood everything. By the time we 
left the baths we heard nothing. We asked German women what had happened 
beforehand. They answered: "We burnt rubbish."
      
      Strong men were selected and carried away in a transport. These people 
returned three months later but they were only shadows of their former selves. 
Now, they could already shout the exact date of their death at their children. 
      
      At the beginning we were very ill, particularly mentally, since our mother 
passed away with 4 little brothers and sisters of ours, and this gave us 
incredible pain.
      
      When we left Auschwitz for another camp, we had to line up in pairs and 
listen to the talk of the Lagerführer, who told us that in case we worked we 
would also be fed, but if we did not we would return to Auschwitz. Be 
industrious  he warned us. We naturally promised to work, as we knew that our 
life depended on it. In a big black car, they had just carried a lot of naked 
people in front of us and this was a warning meant for us. People were silent in 
the big car, they did not say a word, and the car entered the yard of the 
crematorium. I also saw strong men in the car and we did not believe any more 
that we were sent to work, and we also saw empty cars. But luckily it turned out 
that these cars carried bread. They distributed a few loaves of bread among us 
for the journey, so we avoided the crematorium this time.
      
      They transported us to Freudenthal in cattle cars. We worked there 12 
hours a day for a war plant. Food was scarce while we had to work hard. 350 of 
us worked here.
      
      Once, an unfortunate comrade of mine suffered an incident. In the great 
cold, she was sent into the pit, where icy potatoes fell off and buried her 
underneath and she immediately died. We could not save her.
      
      For two days we stayed in the camp together with men. I met my father and 
younger brother here. One night my father sneaked over to us and asked me to 
find my mother, as he did not want to believe such a young woman had been taken 
away.
      
      I knew the rule of the Germans that prescribed the number of cadavers to 
be taken home in cases when there were too many people in the camp.
      
      Once, Dr Mengele came to do a selection also here. The Lagerführer had 
been asked to provide 1,500 weak people as that was how many the crematorium 
needed. However, as there had been a selection the week before, there were not 
enough weak people. When Mengele learnt about it, he appeared the day after and 
collected 6,000 people, who were taken away immediately.
      
      Every week we had to go into disinfecting rooms. At these times they also 
collected all our clothes and killed the lice on them also. As a result we had 
lice also on our clean clothes when they were returned. We had to walk around 
naked during these days. It also happened that we did not get back our clothes 
for an entire week. We covered our bodies with blankets. Our bad clothes were 
returned mixed together even more ragged as they had been before.
      
      If we went to the kitchen to get food we had to wait for hours standing 
erect, which was very difficult. If they found you faulty in any degree, they 
would beat you hard and would slap you. 
      
      The Russians liberated us the 7th of May, 1945. We left the camp and went 
to live in a place for civilians. We could obtain food and clothes and 
everything we needed.
      These were my own experiences. 
      
      I would like to meet my father and brother as soon as possible and 
emigrate together with them.