The person in question has given us the following information:

I was a travelling merchant working for Zwack liquor company. In 1940, I lost my 
job because of Jewish Laws. I went through bad experiences as I could not find a 
job and lived on my savings.

In 1940, I was summoned for labour service. At that time, we were still treated 
relatively decently.

In June of 1944, I was drafted for labour service in Gödöll?. I was brought to 
Budapest and transferred into Nyergesújfalu, while the Arrow Cross robbed 
everything we had. They took rings, watches, money and everything, and 
threatened to shoot us. In Nyergesújfalu we were starving, they gave us nothing 
to eat. We worked in a mine by day and night.

Later, they took us to Magyaróvár to hand us over to the Germans but as I had a 
Swiss Schutzpass I got back to Budapest to Aréna Road. Here they recruited a 
company of labourers and took us to Aggszentpéter, which is next to 
Kápolnásnyék; we worked as labourers on the frontline. We were starving here 
also. We were to support the Todt unit. The 7th of December, gendarmes took me 
to Budapest and handed me over to the police in the Tattersall. The day after, I 
was entrained at Józsefváros railway station. We were around 75 of us in a car, 
men and women together. The journey lasted 18 days. Every five days, we got 50 
grams of bread. We could leave the car to go to the toilet only every fifth day. 
We got no water. Many among those who wanted to escape were shot. The gendarmes 
who accompanied us gave some food to people who still had money.

The 24th of December, we arrived in Buchenwald, where they seized what we had 
and put us up in textile tents. In the great cold of winter my toes became 
frozen. I suffered a lot also because the SS beat me a lot.
      
We spent a week in Buchenwald. The 2nd of January, 1945, they put together an 
railway troop of 10 SS soldiers which was made up of Hungarians and Poles and 
they took us in freight cars by train to the frontline in Offenburg, opposite 
the Rhine. We repaired railway lines. They kept bombing and machine-gunning us. 
Some SS guards did not let us leave the railway station during the bombing: we 
had to stay. In one case, a bombing had 25 casualties. Food was extremely 
scarce. This was the base we used for travelling to different points of the 
frontline. Finally, at the beginning of April, the bridge exploded and the train 
could not proceed. They gave the order to execute everyone. We had been starving 
already for a long time, living on wheat and corn, on anything we found. We got 
no food, and we did not see bread for weeks. The SS gave the order to execute 
all of us but the guards did not want to obey; as a result, we survived.

We started to walk and covered 150 kilometres, but we walked only at night. We 
went in the direction of Undorf-Regensburg and arrived at Dachau. We ate only 
wheat and corn.

We arrived in Dachau in the morning and were about to continue during the night. 
We were told we were going to be executed as they could not suffer Jews in 
Dachau. They did execute the people who arrived the night before; the Americans 
found their bodies. In the evening there was a great storm, and we could not 
proceed so we stayed in Dachau till next morning, when the Americans closed the 
road and they could not bring us away.

The 29th of April, 1945, the Americans entered the town and liberated us. This 
is how we survived. A great number of people died later of typhus and diarrhoea. 
The Americans were good to us but did not give us much to eat.

These were my own experiences.