The above persons relate the following together and supplementing 
each other:

The 120 Jewish families of Visk were all tradesmen and farmers, 
who lived more or less well.

After Easter, they collected the Jews of Visk, and carried them to 
the ghetto of Técső, where there were around 5,000 of us. The 
ghetto was encircled and guarded by gendarmes, while Jewish 
policemen kept order inside. Every morning they woke men up, 
chased them out to do gymnastics, and it of course involved 
harassment. But gendarmes entered flats also during the nights and 
searched for jewellery in the most brutal way. Also the leventes 
took their part in plundering, I gave my watch to a levente. 
People from Dombó tried to escape from the ghetto but they were 
captured and as a punishment they shaved stripes into their hair. 
They beat them up so much that they fainted but they brought them 
around with water and kept beating them so they were carried to 
Auschwitz on stretchers. Men went out to work. We suffered so much 
in the ghetto that it appeared to us a relief when they started 
talking about our departure. First, the people from Técső left, 
together with the Jewish Council, and then it was our turn. We 
were allowed to bring food for two weeks, and clothes, altogether 
50 kilos each, but when they searched us before departure they 
seized almost all of our belongings. There were 68 of us in a 
freight car; they gave us water and two loaves of bread  but that 
was meant for the whole carload of people. We secured a bucket for 
the toilet. We do not know of anyone escaping or dying on the 
road. Germans took charge of us in Kassa, and we arrived in 
Auschwitz after three days of travel, in the morning. When we got 
off, we were lined up, and we went into the baths, and then came 
disinfections and hair shaving. We got into extermination camp C, 
1080 of us in a block, 14 of us on a sleeping place, but later we 
did not even have that: we lay on the floor. Rations comprised 200 
grams of bread, and some soup, which was sandy and without salt so 
we starved a lot. There were selections all the time and once we 
were almost separated from each other. On long days there was a 
strict block curfew, and the Aufseherin, Gresek (Grese) put out 
the eyes of a girl because she talked with an acquaintance through 
the wires.

In October, we left for Ravensbrück with a transport of labourers, 
but first, we spent the night completely naked in the disinfecting 
building. The journey to Ravensbrück lasted for two days, and we 
got bread and Zulag for the travel. The journey was quite all 
right but we suffered a lot from the cold and when we arrived we 
were lodged in a block that functioned as quarantine. There was 
much talk about a doctor called Rosenthal, who poisoned people 
with injections and very many people were his victims.
Soon, we got into Lippstadt. The trip lasted for three days; in 
the cold of November we walked without stockings, without coats, 
only in light sweaters. The provision for three days was half a 
kilo of bread and a little Zulag. The above-mentioned Preisler: I 
started this walk with a temperature of 39 C degrees. I did not 
want to be left behind so I preferred to start with a fever. We 
worked for an aircraft plant in Lippstadt, where they treated us 
in a more humane way; rations and lodgings were also more 
civilized.

When American troops were close to us we hurriedly set off. But 
the 4th of April four of us ran away from the transport. We spent a 
night in a forest, and stayed for three other days here before 
Americans liberated us on the 7th of April. We stayed with a German 
family for four weeks before we got into a Czech camp, where there 
were numerous political prisoners, officers who had got out of 
jail and were in horrible conditions. Later, a Czech car came from 
Prague to fetch us and we travelled till Prague by this car and 
carried on by train via Pozsony.

Future plans: at the moment we are at a complete loss.