The person in question has given us the following information:

My last residency was in Beregszász. After German invasion in 
April 1944, Jews were constantly harassed. We did not dare to go 
into the street because people would beat up any of the Jews they 
noticed. The windows of wealthier Jews were broken. Later, they 
ordered Jews to wear discriminating yellow stars. Trade licences 
were withdrawn, while gendarmes seized money and valuables. We 
lived in constant terror. One early morning they came to fetch us 
and to bring us into the ghetto. We spent four weeks in the ghetto 
of Beregszász, and at the end of May, they chased us to the 
station, where they entrained us. The way to the station was hard. 
We had difficulties to walk with luggage and children so gendarmes 
hurried us with guns and bayonets. There were 75 of us in a 
freight car. They put in the car a half kilo of bread for each of 
us and a bucket of water for all. Hungarian gendarmes escorted us 
till Kassa, where they handed us over to Germans. Labour 
servicemen gave us water in Kassa. In Kassa I dared to say to one 
of the gendarmes that a kid was extremely thirsty and I asked for 
some water in the name of God, but I got such a slap in the face 
that I felt dizzy. Three days later, we arrived in Auschwitz.

When we arrived in Auschwitz, Polish men instructed us right at 
the railway station to leave our luggage on the train since they 
would carry them later to our place. Dr Mengele was whistling and 
selecting people in a nonchalant way: he sent the elderly and 
mothers with children to the left side, people fit for work to the 
right. The young were told to hand over their children to the old. 
If they would not, they took them away together with the elderly. 
They told us that we would see our families already in the 
evening. We believed it; hence we went to the baths calm, and got 
to know the sad truth only the following day. After the baths they 
cut our hair off, deprived us of our hair on our bodies, seized 
our clothes and shoes, and gave us ragged shoes and a single 
garment that had no back or front. 

I stayed in Auschwitz till January 1945. First, I was put in Camp 
A, where I was part of an Aussenkommando. After # months, I 
started to go to work to Brezinka from here. The windows of 
Brezinka faced the crematorium. I saw them leading people in the 
building that had the indication Disinfections, from where they 
never returned. Fire in the crematorium was burning day and night 
in this period. Our job was to sort out the belongings of the 
unfortunate victims. We could also make up sometimes for food 
scarcity. We found food among this stuff and we sometimes stole it 
in secret. It was horrible when sometimes we found the belongings 
or documents of our own relatives. The crematorium was covered 
with a red blanket so that we could not see it. I worked here for 
6 weeks before I was transferred to Camp B, from where I went to 
work in a weaving mill. We had to prepare 30 metres of material a 
day. If you could not get ready with it they wrote up your number 
and gave you a beating back in the camp.

In January 1945, we were evacuated from Auschwitz and were carried 
to Bergen-Belsen. We went on working in the weaving mill also 
here. Aufseherins and the bosses were good to us; only food was 
meagre. We suffered horribly from hunger. There was no opportunity 
to wash, we got lice; we lay on the floor pressed to one another. 
People died one after the other. We also suffered a lot from the 
cold. We had not enough clothes; we did not have coats but only a 
thin striped garment. At the beginning of March, for three weeks 
we got no bread at all, and we also lacked water. The number of 
cadavers grew every day. There were so many dead bodies lying 
around in the camp that we had to walk over them because one could 
not avoid them.

On the 15th of April 1945, the glorious English liberated us. 
Unfortunately, my surviving companions and I had already fallen 
ill with typhus. My hands and feet were swollen, and that was how 
the English found us. They took me to the hospital in Bergen, 
where they treated me for 3 months. Treatment in hospital was good 
and I gradually recovered. The Swedes invited 50,000 Hungarians to 
their country promising them to provide them food and clothing. 
The people who could already walk did leave for Sweden. As I still 
did not feel ok, brokenheartedly I had to drop out of this nice 
journey. When I recovered I travelled home with the Czech-
Slovakian transport. I spent a day in Prague, where the Czechs 
received us movingly. Now, I am in Budapest in the home of 
"DEGOB", where I heard that my children have returned home safely. 
Now, I am only waiting for my husband so we could enjoy all 
together our abandoned home as in the old times.