The person in question has given us the following information:

Before Easter, Jewish Laws forced me in Kalocsa to wear a yellow star. Later, we 
moved together. Jewish trade licences, shops were seized. 
On a Saturday they instructed us to get packed in two hours. We were not allowed 
to pack more than two sets of clothes, shoes and food for two weeks. Everything 
else had to be handed over including gold. They threatened to shoot us 
immediately if they found gold on us. We packed and started off towards Szeged, 
where we were lodged in a brick factory. There was misery. Everybody lay on the 
floor. 
The 17th of June, they entrained us: they crammed 80 people in each freight car. 
Germans took charge of us in Kassa, where they searched us and newly declared 
that they would shoot anyone who hid gold. We had to hand over money. 
We arrived in Auschwitz, we got off but could not bring any luggage. They said 
they would carry them to our place. The SS singled out parents and elderly 
people, and sent the young to the other side. Everything happened hurriedly, 
there was not even time to say hello, and they shouted "Los, Los": go fast. 
Mothers with little children were also sent into the group of the elderly and 
were led to the gas chamber. When we were walking we saw that they were burning 
dirty quilts. But there were some who escaped and they told us that there had 
been people who had not been killed by the gas and they hung on to the wall, 
because they wanted to live so much, till the flames swallowed them. There was a 
continuous smell of bones and they kept telling us: we are burning dirty Jewish 
rags. 
They disinfected us, cut our hair, we went out and they lodged us in the camp. 
First, we got into a place where we lay on the floor like sardines. In the 
morning we got a little coffee but we got no bread. At noon they gave us some 
kind of food prepared of nettles, which you would not even give to geese. The 
bread they gave us was made of bran. Every day, we had to be lined up for roll 
call early in the morning. If someone did not stand properly or a person was 
missing from the barrack, all the people from the block had to be on their knees 
on pebbles and mud. There was a doctor, Dr Mengele, who came to check whether 
people were not too thin. They said to the thin that they would take them to a 
summer resort. Mengele also selected one of my sisters and they took her away. I 
have not heard about her ever since. There was a beautiful woman called Grese 
who rode a bike. Thousands and thousands of people were standing there on their 
knees in scorching heat, and she took delight in watching us. Selections were 
very frequent: every week. People hid, especially who were thin but it was 
difficult to hide. If you hid one day the other day they would certainly catch 
you. 
That was how we lived till August, when they took us into a war plant in 
Fallersleben, which was a weapons factory. ### and we made big funnels in which 
they put the bombs. They treated us quite nicely. People died but of natural 
death. There were two shifts a day and we worked 10-12 hours a day. We left this 
place for the camp of Salzwedel, in the direction of Hanover.
We did not need to work in Salzwedel. We already staved here, we had little 
bread to eat. We were so hungry that we ate raw turnips. 
The 11th of April 1945, Americans liberated us, and later the English took their 
place and we had a very good life. These were my own experiences. 

My future plans? I will go to Palestine with my brother.