The person in question has given us the following information:

Jews started to be oppressed as far as the old Jewish Hospital is concerned 
right after the First World War, when in counter-revolutionary times after the 
Communist era anti-Semite harassment started to take shape in the form of brutal 
street fights and arrests. They took politically suspicious people and - one can 
say  evidently suspicious Jews into Garrison Albrecht that lay opposite the 
hospital. During the nights we heard dreadful screams, cries and wailing. In the 
mornings badly beaten people received first aid from the hospital.

Identity checks in the streets began also in this period. When we returned home 
in the evening or at night because of medical duties, it depended often on luck 
that the henchmen of the Prónay squad or of another squad did not capture us.

When the law of numerus clausus was published, the hospital started to receive 
and employ students of medicine who were excluded from universities, and later 
also doctors who had applied in vain for a job at the university hospital of 
Budapest. What is more, the hospital held regular lectures to make up for 
university studies, and kept in-service trainings in order to support the 
victims of numerus clausus.

In 1938, patients and fugitives from neighbouring countries, victims of the 
ongoing fascist persecution of Jews, started to flow into the hospital. These 
patients often spent years in the hospital. Although the National Central 
Authority for Controlling Foreigners, the police and the Minister of the 
Interior took different rules against it, and doctors came to control our work, 
the hospital tried to keep these unfortunates on its premises for a long time. 
It offered asylum to immigrant doctors from neighbouring countries and often 
also employed them.

Germans appeared for the first time in the hospital in April 1944. Negotiations 
started in a considerably civilised manner about handing over the hospital, 
nevertheless, as it is known, this process ended in the seizure of the emptied 
hospital, and in the removal, or rather kicking out of Jewish patients and 
doctors.

The first time in April 1944, and later in May, the managers, and the then 
Director of the hospital sent me to the offices of the Hungarian National Jewish 
Aid Action in the school building in Bethlen Square No. 2, to make an attempt to 
obtain funds for a temporary emergency hospital. This was terribly difficult, as 
we had to leave all equipment behind, and not only medical equipment but also 
bedclothes, linen. Consequently, we had nothing to equip the planned emergency 
hospital.

At the beginning, conditions were quite miserable since without any equipment we 
had to take care of a growing number of old sick men and women, and of people 
who had lost their flats. People lay on bunks, on straw mattresses, and if they 
could not bring some, they did not have linen either. Sanitation was poor, 
medicine and lint was lacking. Later, as there was greater and greater need, the 
religious community, the Hungarian National Jewish Aid Action and charity 
actions made it possible for us to have enough equipment to provide at least 
elementary medical services in a satisfactory way until the months of the 
summer, June-July. Apart from the patients who needed hospital care in a normal 
way, as in the years of peace immigrants gave the greatest trouble to the 
managers of the hospital. These were Jews who had lost their flats - whole 
families, together with the elderly, children and babies; politically interned 
people who were transferred here from Kistarcsa and others who were officially 
sent here from detention in Rökk Szilárd Street. Often we had to verify and make 
credible that these people had a disease that they had only simulated. Controls 
were repeated week after week and often day after day. At the beginning, these 
health checks were carried out by military doctors. I have to point out that 
they had mostly humane ways, and later even police doctors were quite tolerant 
regarding our medical diagnoses, but in July and September police committees and 
particularly German military delegates from the Court of the Agglomeration of 
Pest, especially Staff Sergeant or SS Sturmbannführer Mengele was viciously 
rigid. If patients were on their lists, even if they were truly sick, no one 
could stop them from carrying them into the infamous jail of the Court of the 
Agglomeration of Pest. It happened only exceptionally that they accepted our 
medical opinion and allowed one or two weeks of delay.

Police officer Ubrizsy played a similarly cruel role when selecting and taking 
away patients from the hospital. The following case of the beginning of 
September is very characteristic of his manners.

Early in the morning, I got the news from the hospital that officer Ubrizsy had 
appeared with a police committee, or more precisely with policemen, in order to 
take away patients. Among the patients he named there were sick people who were 
in real need of hospital care, among others almost completely blind people, and 
lame in both legs. As I was not in the hospital I protested on the phone against 
their arrest. The officer replied that I should go to Röck Szilárd Street as the 
senior doctor of the hospital, to where he would carry the sick people in any 
case, and where he would select 3-4 people, those who had the most severe 
diseases. And this was what happened. I managed to get to Röck Szilárd Street by 
a police car together with the caretaker of the hospital Mermelstein. Ubrizsy 
gave me the instruction to select 3-4 of the most severely sick, and reassured 
us that he would let us carry them back to the hospital. Luckily, there was an 
air raid alarm, and Mr Ubrizsy, with the policemen who were on guard in Röck 
Szilárd Street, hurried quickly to the air raid shelter. I managed to take 
advantage of this psychological moment and thanks to the ingenuity of the 
caretaker of the hospital we returned with 22 people to the hospital.

From the middle of October till the 10th of November, I had to dig trenches. My 
company was made up of around 60 doctors and the same amount of engineers. They 
lodged us in the attic and the stall of an abandoned Jewish house in the village 
Pócsmegyer on the Szentendre Island. We had had no straw to lie on. I was the 
companys doctor; consultation hour was between 5:30 and 6:30 at dawn. I had to 
work in rainy weather below the gate in poor light. In the first days we had no 
food at all and we starved. In the following days we managed to get hold of 
sufficient food for satisfying the calorie need of people at rest. 40 to 60-
year-old people had to dig trenches all day long in rain and cold. Treatment was 
severe but there were no atrocities.

When I returned to the emergency hospital in Bethlen Square, which had already 
obtained the protection of the Red Cross, and even of the Papal Legation and the 
Swedish Embassy, I found it in the most deprived and tragic condition. Hundreds 
of Jews attacked the building in order to escape the ghetto. We had to put them 
up, although the floors of corridors and wards were full and often three people 
tried to stay transversely in the same bed, and later, often 1,000 people were 
crammed in the air raid shelter where there were places for 700 at the most. It 
is quite miraculous that this overcrowded state did not lead to major 
catastrophes; not to mention the fact that we managed to avoid the spread of 
epidemics under these awful conditions except for minor dysentery and diarrhoea 
epidemics.

In December, the Arrow Cross and the SS frequently visited the hospital. In most 
cases we managed to thwart them partly by pleading with them, partly by handing 
over watches, valuables, food, etc. and obtained that they did not take anyone 
away.

One of the most horrible nights was on the 28th of December, when SS officers 
and privates together with Hungarian policemen attacked the building. They flung 
the doors open on the first floor and partly on the ground floor and chased the 
people who did not lie in the wards out to the courtyard in flimsy clothes in 
the cold of the winter. They picked both men and women, who had to go with hands 
kept upwards, while machine guns were targeted at their chests. They had to line 
up in the street and had to stay there for around 2 or 3 hours facing destiny 
that appeared to be fatal, according to the information we obtained. Later, they 
led 400 of them into the temple in Bethlen Square up to the choir. They had to 
sit on the floor while they started to select the so-called suspicious ones in 
one of the corners of the choir. Naturally, no one knew who would come next. I 
have to add that there were a few labour servicemen in the hospital who tried to 
escape. They shot two of them in flight and very seriously injured the other 
two.

They selected 22 people. Perhaps selections came to an end because the light 
suddenly went out, and they could not continue their work in the dark. They left 
the building with the 22 people, of whom we still do not know anything certain.

At the end of December and in the fist days of January, Jews who found asylum in 
the hospital went through all levels of suffering, hunger and thirst. The siege 
was going on and patients lay in wards that had no doors or windows because of 
war damages to the building. It was around 0 degrees Celsius inside, and there 
was no heating. Most of the patients, in particular the elderly, died of 
starvation or froze to death, not because of a disease. One can imagine that the 
cure patients received from us was often not more than a consoling word that we 
kept repeating.

As the siege went on, the number of injured continuously grew. The fact that we 
managed to keep a sufficient quantity of spared lint and surgical equipment to 
treat not only the patients injured in the building but also German and 
Hungarian soldiers coming from outside may have contributed to our lucky 
survival. These people managed to block Arrow Cross men, who reappeared almost 
every day, from committing atrocities.

After the mental liberation  if I may use this term - of the 14th of January, 
physical liberation came with considerable delays because of known reasons. The 
siege of Buda lasted another four weeks, and during this time it was impossible 
to resolve the problem of food shortage or improve sanitation in the hospital. 
The few people who worked with dedication in the hospital had to struggle like 
Sisyphus to give some protection to the several hundreds of remaining patients 
and to their relatives against diseases and epidemics.