The person in question has given us the following information:

In 1939, my trade licence was withdrawn in Rákosszentmihály because of the 
Jewish Laws. Thereafter, I was a product manager for a company in Pest.

The first time I was drafted for labour service was in 1940. I worked in Komárom 
on railway constructions.

In 1943, I did labour service a second time; this time I worked in Fülek for a 
factory producing tools.

In 1944, I was in Transylvania, in Kismonostorszeg, and we worked on railway 
constructions at Bethlen. The treatment and food was bad here. We worked 17-18 
hours a day while they beat and battered us. The sapper company treated us 
extremely ruthlessly.

September the 6th, they took us to Egerbegy next to Aranyostorda, where we dug 
trenches directly behind the frontline. Three days later, on verbal command the 
frontline was breached and we had to escape. Close to Zsib the troop was 
captured and we were escorted by gendarmes like fugitives. After 5 days stay 
the Russians broke through the frontline and we escaped together with the 
company. After 320 kilometres of walking we finally arrived to the outskirts of 
Budapest, to Rákoskeresztúr. There we got the Swiss Schutzpass and letters of 
protection, which we used when getting into the camp of Colombus Street inside 
Budapest.

The 3rd of December, the Arrow Cross took the camp of Colombus Street by 
surprise and having seized all my documents and valuables, they escorted us to 
the KISOK-ground. From the KISOK-ground they took us into Teleki Square No. 10, 
from where we were taken to the railway station of Józsefváros and entrained the 
4th of December. They put 73 people in the cattle car where I was, which meant 
that we were really crammed. We had nothing to eat or drink. The spared food we 
still had proved to be insufficient for this journey.

After 10 days of miserable and unpleasant journey we arrived in Bergen-Belsen, 
where we were put up in a Sonderlager.

Little food, great amounts of dirt and lice  that was our life there.

We did not have to work, and would not have had time for that as we used most of 
the time for lining up for roll calls. We stood on the courtyard from 8 am till 
12 am every day. No matter if it rained or snowed, if it was cold, if there was 
mud or ice.

Mortality in our camp was around daily 11-12 a day, mostly caused by hunger. 

The approach of the Americans made them empty the camp of Bergen-Belsen and we 
set off the 6th of April. On the way to Theresienstadt Americans captured us on 
the 13th of April and liberated us. It was at Zlelitz, 16 kilometres form 
Magdeburg. From this moment on, we had a better life.

These were my personal experiences.