The person in question has given us the following information:

In May, 1944, bishop Sándor Raffay sent me to the "Good Shepard" committee to 
save children of labour servicemen and of Christian parents but of Jewish 
origin. We agreed to set up childrens institutions and orphanages for 
accommodating these children. There was of course already talk of deportations 
in Budapest, therefore the question was raised where deportations would lead to.

I tried to get hold of a villa in Buda, and to stay there with around 30-40 
children but I did not succeed. Everywhere they asked either for a city permit 
or a state permit. At the end we submitted a request to the office of the prime 
minister; which was finally listened to by Baky, so we appeared for an interview 
together with József Eliás. This time they told us not to get involved, 
otherwise we would be interned. It was around mid June.

Having received no state or church support we looked for a building on our own 
at the feet of Széchenyi Hill. We found one but when the owner learnt why we 
needed it he immediately changed his mind, while the agent of course kept the 
deposit. We realised we needed to find another way to success, when in the 
middle of August the delegate of the International Red Cross Sir Frigyes Born 
re-contacted us after an initial meeting in March. That time, having returned 
from Sweden he had posed the question to me as to a member of the Church what 
the Church had done in the interest of Jews in Hungary. I had mentioned him this 
plan, and now, the 15th of August, he contacted me with this in mind. He 
suggested we established an orphanage under his auspices. He gave us panels with 
symbols of immunity for two buildings, in case owners offered their property for 
establishing an orphanage free. One was in 15 Bérczi Street, the other one was 
the Protestant orphanage established two years before in Noszvaj (next to Eger). 
The 5th of October, we opened the orphanage of 15 Berczi Street with 30 
children, all Jews. Throngs of people came to the office of the Good Shepard in 
5 Lázár Street to get their children put up. Soon the orphanage became too small 
and we had to look for a new one. We were supported by the organisation of the 
International Red Cross, which had been established meanwhile. People offered 
their villas to be protected by the Red Cross one after the other in fear of the 
Arrow Cross and of Germans. In agreement with the delegates we put these villas 
in use as orphanages. At the end of October, during the coup of the Arrow Cross 
we already had 6 of these villas furnished as orphanages.

By the end of October, International Red Cross came up with a plan focusing on 
saving children that was known as Section B in the Red Cross. Section A was 
organised by the head of Zionists Ottó Komoly. The delegation entrusted me to 
lead Section B. To cover the expenses of Section B the Hagenmacher factory gave 
the first donation of 100,000 peng?s; the rest was advanced us by the 
International Red Cross, which set up a financial department in charge of 
 May, 1944, bishop Sándor Raffay sent me to the "Good Shepard" committee to save 
children of labour servicemen and of Christian parents but of Jewish origin. We 
agreed to set up childrens institutions and orphanages for accommodating these 
children. There was of course already talk of deportations in Budapest, 
therefore the question was raised where deportations would lead to.

I tried to get hold of a villa in Buda, and to stay there with around 30-40 
children but I did not succeed. Everywhere they asked either for a city permit 
or a state permit. At the end we submitted a request to the office of the prime 
minister; which was finally listened to by Baky, so we appeared for an interview 
together with József Eliás. This time they told us not to get involved, 
otherwise we would be interned. It was around mid June.

Having received no state or church support we looked for a building on our own 
at the feet of Széchenyi Hill. We found one but when the owner learnt why we 
needed it he immediately changed his mind, while the agent of course kept the 
deposit. We realised we needed to find another way to success, when in the 
middle of August the delegate of the International Red Cross Sir Frigyes Born 
re-contacted us after an initial meeting in March. That time, having returned 
from Sweden he had posed the question to me as to a member of the Church what 
the Church had done in the interest of Jews in Hungary. I had mentioned him this 
plan, and now, the 15th of August, he contacted me with this in mind. He 
suggested we established an orphanage under his auspices. He gave us panels with 
symbols of immunity for two buildings, in case owners offered their property for 
establishing an orphanage free. One was in 15 Bérczi Street, the other one was 
the Protestant orphanage established two years before in Noszvaj (next to Eger). 
The 5th of October, we opened the orphanage of 15 Berczi Street with 30 
children, all Jews. Throngs of people came to the office of the Good Shepard in 
5 Lázár Street to get their children put up. Soon the orphanage became too small 
and we had to look for a new one. We were supported by the organisation of the 
International Red Cross, which had been established meanwhile. People offered 
their villas to be protected by the Red Cross one after the other in fear of the 
Arrow Cross and of Germans. In agreement with the delegates we put these villas 
in use as orphanages. At the end of October, during the coup of the Arrow Cross 
we already had 6 of these villas furnished as orphanages.

By the end of October, International Red Cross came up with a plan focusing on 
saving children that was known as Section B in the Red Cross. Section A was 
organised by the head of Zionists Ottó Komoly. The delegation entrusted me to 
lead Section B. To cover the expenses of Section B the Hagenmacher factory gave 
the first donation of 100,000 peng?s; the rest was advanced us by the 
International Red Cross, which set up a financial department in charge of 
procuring food supplies. They had stores in Buda. Soon, by the middle of 
November, this financial office had to supply 18 childrens institutes, 
transporting milk, flower, sugar, potatoes, fat, coal, wood, etc. into these 
houses. Those parents who could afford to pay us for accommodating their 
children gave 300 peng?s for this service. Protection was guaranteed by the 
printed plates of the International Red Cross and by a list of names signed by 
the delegate. During the Arrow Cross era I had to present these letters of 
protection with the attached lists to the Ministry of the Foreign Affairs, 
because the International Red Cross negotiated only with the Foreign Minister, 
who recognised these houses as protected houses.

Naturally, this could not remain a secret, particularly because the number of 
these institutes for children in Buda villas grew to 26 by the end of November. 
Party members and leaders got especially curious how many and what kind of 
children we supervised. Children were not allowed to leave the gardens and 
visitors were not accepted because we were worried of being disguised.

The first attack was against the institute in 12 Ribáry Street. One of the 
leaders of the Arrow Cross came from the headquarters of the party in Kapás 
Street to procure a flat for an SS squad. There was a Jewish flat in the 
building where the orphanage was and that was what they wanted to obtain. This 
is how they found out that there were more than 50 girls of Jewish origin put up 
there. Right away they wanted to empty the institute. As our office in Fillér 
Street was quite close I ran to the place and told them that the house and the 
orphanage was occupied with the consent of the Foreign Minister, so they could 
not do anything. They threatened us to come back but they could do nothing as I 
showed them the documents, however they took away one of the doctors of 
Christian origin, the doctor of the institute Imre Thaly because he had Semite 
features and could not produce certificates proving his Christian origin till 
his grandmother. Half an hour later, I followed him to get him freed. In the 
room of party leaders they told me off using harsh words asking me why I 
dedicated myself to such a work as a clergyman and why I did not take care and 
fed children of the street who were in escape from the Russians. I immediately 
offered them to take any child they sent to me in whatever numbers. They cooled 
down and let me and Imre Thaly go. But they did not send any child because there 
were not any.

Two days later, the delegation of Fillér Street was attacked by 50 armed men of 
the Arrow Cross. They got in, and captured and wanted to shoot the son of the 
owner of the house and his servant, who was a French prisoner escapee. It 
happened at midnight. Right away the delegate came by car and also brother 
Bagosi joined him, who was responsible for these affairs in the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs. He told them off and declared that the houses protected by the 
International Red Cross enjoyed rights of extraterritoriality. They were taken 
in by this lie everywhere which reveals how dull they were. However, the fifty 
boys frustrated by their failure said lets look for that priest, who also 
lives somewhere here. Luckily, they did not find me as I changed my flat every 
two weeks.

The 8th of December, police occupied the office of the delegation (51 Fillér 
Street) and my office (34 Fillér Street). They left a police guard at the gate 
who partly protected us, partly controlled what was going on inside. At the same 
time the Gestapo attacked the institute for children in 32 Lovas Street, where 
70 children of Jewish origin were supervised by women of Jewish origin. This was 
anyway the case everywhere. The building of 32 Lovas Street was earlier the 
residence of the French Embassy and of military attaché Alliée, and was a 
collecting place for French prisoners of war. I did not know about it. French 
prisoners of war also had a depot here. I found myself in quite a dangerous 
situation when I got accompanied by three detectives of the Gestapo. They talked 
to me rudely but with benevolence. They told me not to care about anything, they 
had nothing to do either with me or with the orphanage of the Red Cross. I 
should just go about my business and they would do the same. They took away the 
servant, and one of the chambermaids. Later, we learnt that she had been the 
secretary of Alliée, and the servant was a French war prisoner. However, as they 
showed up no evidence against them, they let them free. This visit was repeated 
later twice, till the time delegate Born somehow managed to smooth the situation 
so they stopped molesting us. I do not know how he managed to appease them.

Around the 10-12th of December, there was another nasty attack against us lead 
by László Endre himself. In the building of 8 Rozskovics Street (in Pasarét) 12 
Jewish children were put up by a family, in the flat of a major who protected 
the children himself. Party men threatened the major several times that they 
would denounce him hiding Jewish children in his flat instead of letting the 
house be used by fugitive families. Finally, László Endre (who was the 
ministerial commissioner of military operations) appeared with a machine gun. 
The landlord called his attention to the protection of the International Red 
Cross in vain. First, he wanted to take away the landlord himself but half an 
hour later, he made party members transport the children into the party 
residence in Olasz Avenue. A part of the children escaped from there, while 
smaller ones (between the age of 6 to 8) were let free 24 hours later after long 
pleadings. I managed to put up four of the children who had escaped in another 
institution, while I brought back the rest to 8 Rozskovics Street. Later on, 
they left the children alone since they reckoned that already all necessary 
measures had been taken.

6-8 Guyon Richard Street had a similar story. Here I managed to thwart the 
attack of the Arrow Cross who were intimidating us with pistols when I got there 
personally and explained them we had the right to stay. Nevertheless, these 
attacks already signalled the future decree that aimed at putting also these 
children into the ghetto.  We were informed on the 15th of December that 
children had to be carried into the ghetto. The same day me and the officer of 
the International Red Cross Pál Kovács, approached Solymosi, who had been our 
contact regarding the childrens case in the ghetto. We had to look for him 
twice before we found him in Veres Pálné Street. Even the heads of the already 
established ghetto were moved by our activity. We sabotaged the demands of each 
other in a very clever way. Solymosi wanted a separate childrens ghetto set up 
inside the area of the ghetto offering space for at least 3,000 children. 
International Red Cross demanded fully disinfected and furnished houses for 
children so that their health would not be damaged. Solymosi acknowledged this 
demand as he was worried about foreign reproach. The heads of the ghetto delayed 
preparing these buildings claiming that they lacked the sufficient time for 
that, etc. We managed to get the original deadline of the 15th postponed till 
the 18th. Naturally, the flats were not ready by the 18th either, hence we used 
this excuse not to move in but kept the children ready. Earlier, I tried to 
contact personally Minister of Foreign Affairs Gábor Kemény who gave me an 
appointment but at the end there was no personal audience but I had to hand in 
my opinion in writing. Using evidences I proved him that only 30% of the more 
than 1,200 children in the 26 orphanages (section B) were Christians with Jewish 
origin. Since the 10th of December, we had been working hard on renaming 
children. The objective was to make it difficult to prove we kept children of 
Jewish origin in case they wanted to investigate us. We had to teach children 
older than 2 their new names and family history. Thanks to my letter nothing 
tragic happened. Gendarmes occupied the 26 orphanages in the morning of the 18th 
of December and stayed at the gates till 6 pm. The Arrow Cross did not come, 
whereas in the orphanages of Pest the Arrow Cross came with the police and took 
away the children without comments. Section B had already two institutes which 
we set up close to the ghetto so that we could accommodate children in the 
would-be houses of the ghetto without difficulties or endangering childrens 
health. One of them was in the Evangelical gymnasium in Vilma Királyné Road, the 
other one was in the headquarters of Vasas in 6 Magdolna Street. Here the Arrow 
Cross and the police prepared a list of people and declared they were going to 
return in 24 hours to fetch them. Thanks God they did not come back! Many of 
them got scared and ran away from the institute in Vilma Királyné Road where 
there were mainly mothers with their children, altogether 120 of them. This 
happened the 18th of December. At noon we were informed that the deadline was 
further postponed till the 24th. Unfortunately, I learnt that this was not 
respected in Munkácsy Mihály Street, in Király Street and in Perczell Mór 
Street. From these places children were transported into the ghetto. In these 
days one of the nurses was captured in the street and was taken into the ghetto 
where she got to these children. On the 20th, she escaped from the ghetto and 
asked desperately for help for these children. International Red Cross brought 
out these children with amazing courage on stretchers in vehicles. They put on 
the armband of the Arrow Cross and pretended the children were sick. They saved 
around 600 children this way. Unfortunately, they could not secure these poor 
starving children a place to stay. They were forced either to wander around in 
the streets or to hide in abandoned houses. Once, I collected three of these 
children in Pest purely because a few passers-by noticed the car of the Red 
Cross and told me in which house they saw one or two children hiding.

We were waiting for December the 24th partly with joy, partly in terror. This 
was the date they promised to take a new transport of children away. We brought 
the children whose identity we could not satisfactorily certificate into the 
building in Magdolna Street and Vilma királyné Road.

Nevertheless, we could celebrate the eve of Christmas day, the 24th of December 
in peace. Children celebrated the feast in the institutes in peace and 
happiness, since no one touched them. The morning of 25th we already spent in 
the cellars because shells started to be fired. We felt relieved that we would 
not be molested any more, and in fact there were no attacks later. They not even 
did bother about the two institutes in Pest. Till January the 13th, the day of 
their liberation they could live in the cellar in peace and security.

It was Gods special miracle that still the 22nd of December the financial 
department gave us food supplies for more than 6 weeks, hence all institutes had 
supplies for more than six weeks which made it much easier to suffer the period 
of the siege.

During the siege three or four buildings got damaged in Buda but children were 
not injured. However, it was later difficult to supply children of these houses 
as they had to leave the buildings and leave the food also behind so they were 
indeed starving. One of the institutes in 29 Bogár Street was right on the 
frontline. The 4th of January, they came to my own flat with 32 children and 
asked me to put them up somewhere. Although the German headquarters were in the 
neighbouring villa I could accommodate these children, one may say, they took 
refuge in the protection of the German army. SS soldiers themselves carried the 
children of 2-3 years on their shoulders from the frontline, of course they did 
not know who they were. The whole event happened during night. When the chief 
major of that section of the frontline realised what had happened he told us he 
would not fight against children but did not want to see here grown-up men. 
Afterwards, thanks to his benevolence, we starved less as we got some share of 
the various acquisitions of the soldiers. The major died on the Pest bank still 
the 13th or 14th of January. 

The 29th of January, we were liberated: altogether 32 children and 20 adults.

Immediately after the liberation I started to look for a new gathering place for 
the children. With the permission of temporary authorities I received a building 
in 92 Pasaréti Road, where I collected the children who asked for help coming 
from these bombed and abandoned orphanages. From the reports of these children 
we learnt that - miraculously - no one had been injured, no one had gone 
missing, and many even found their parents or relatives.
Ten days later, we got a new building in 19 Völgy Street because the space we 
had was not enough any more. I could gather here as many as 120 children. 
Naturally, we were cold and hungry. After Buda got entirely liberated, that is, 
the 13th of February, newer and newer institutes reported us about children 
handed over to their parents.

By the 15th of March, the institute became almost empty. Only 35 children of 
Jewish origin remained, who had been with us for long. The rest found either 
their parents or their relatives. But no one came to fetch these 30-35 children. 
These orphans or half orphans became the core of the orphanage and childrens 
institute in 48 Budakeszi Road, which was set up by the charity of Good Shepard 
Mission on the 1st of April, 1945.