The person in question has given us the following information:


I lived with my parents and four brothers and sisters. When Jews 
were collected gendarmes escorted us into the ghetto of Munk√°cs, 
too. We spent here four weeks and had to lay bricks from the 
morning till the evening.

They entrained us and we got to Auschwitz, where they separated me 
from my relatives and I remained completely on my own. I went to a 
block where we did nothing but sat there from the morning till the 
evening for three weeks, and this idleness was like poison, 
particularly in that confused state of mind. Later, I went to 
Birkenau with a transport.

We lived in the camp and went to work to Brezinka. There were 5 
crematoria in Birkenau, and Brezinka was in the middle of them. 
Brezinka was made up of huge barracks where we carried, after 
careful selections, all the belongings of deported people: their 
last properties. One could find here everything starting from 
clothes, food, and bedclothes to the most expensive jewellery, 
precious letters and photos. We saw the most beautiful things here 
since everyone brought here the best belongings they had because 
no one thought that even that last rucksack would be seized.

We were not allowed to keep anything. They searched us every week 
and if they found something on someone they would cut her hair 
off, beat her up or send her to do another job. Our job was 
relatively easy and good. For example, not even selections did 
pertain to us, so we did not have to be anxious about our lives 
all the time. There were two white dots on our clothes and we wore 
white headscarves. Later, we got into the weaving mill and worked 
there till December.

In December I went to Weiswasser with a transport. We worked for 
an ammunition plant. It was not hard work but we hardly got 
anything to eat, and were terribly starving. We stayed here till 
the 5th of May, and worked even on the last days, when German 
soldiers and SS-men brought down the weapons from the factory and 
wanted to shoot us. Their commander told them not to shoot us 
because Russians would arrive soon and they would do the same to 
them.

Since their own lives were dear to them they finally gave up their 
lethal plan and left. We were left on our own, and three days 
later, Russians arrived.

I went to live with a Czech woman. When I recovered from typhus I 
helped her in the garden. I have heard that my two brothers live 
and have returned; now I am going to look for them.