The person in question has given us the following information:

I passed the days of the siege in Weiss Alice Hospital. The 2nd of January, 
1945, an Arrow Cross group entered the hospital, as they said to control 
Schutzpasses. Naturally, they did not find them acceptable, and they continued 
with the identity check. They gathered us in a room and selected and separated 
36 of us. There was no one older than 70 in this selected group, while there 
were some severely sick people among them, like someone with advanced cancer. I 
asked for permission to go up to my room for my stuff, but they let me go only 
with an escort.

As I later learnt, it was 3 am when we departed among falling bombs and shells 
with the alleged reason to get our identity checked. They took us to the 
building of the Arrow Cross in Pozsonyi Road. First, they led us into a 
completely dark room, and later led us into another room, and on the pretext of 
checking our identity the Arrow Cross committee seized all our belongings. 
They took my coat, my gloves, turned out my pockets, took off also the two 
blouses I had on to search it and check whether I had not hidden anything or 
sewed something valuable in them. At the end, they even seized my handkerchief. 
Having searched us they sent everyone into the lobby, and when we were all 
there, they rechecked whether we did not leave anything behind, any food in the 
searching room. Naturally, they collected what they still found there. Now, they 
led us back into the room where we were the first time. There were already some 
people here when our group of 36 people arrived; at the end there might have 
been 40-42 of us altogether. Everyone tried to find some good posture. The 
guards of the Arrow Cross made sure we did not talk to each other. We did not 
get anything to eat, if someone asked for water, they conceded to give it.

I have to note that we had lived so isolated from everything in Weiss Alice 
Hospital that we had not heard about the already frequent cases when they shot 
people into the Danube. I did not suspect anything like that, and believed we 
were going to be put into the ghetto after they had robbed us. 

In the morning, someone asked what would happen to us, where they would bring 
us. They answered we were going to be taken to Buda to do some work. All day 
long we sat there gloomy and exhausted, while during the night we had to start 
off lined up in pairs. It was a light night with an open sky and we could 
clearly see the fights. We were terribley cold, as we were badly dressed and had 
no coats. We were walking along the Danube towards the Parliament. It was 
horrible what we saw: all the way along the bank of the Danube dead bodies and 
horses were lying around. We arrived close to the Chain Bridge, where they 
wanted to lead us down the stairs next to the Parliament. My partner commented: 
"Look, they want to do something evil. Since the stairs were already bombed and 
we could not go down to the bank the Arrow Cross leader told us we would go now 
to Buda. And so we did: we crossed the Danube on the Chain Bridge. On the other 
bank we started to head towards Margit Bridge. We were led to the lower quay. 
Women went ahead, and men  around eight of them  followed behind. Suddenly, 
the leader said that men should stay behind and women should proceed. Next, we 
heard more shots from close. The woman at my side commented again: "Look, these 
have been shot!" I still did not want to believe they could be so evil, and said 
it could not happen that so many people got shot and you could not hear a voice. 
I still did not know what it meant if someone was shot in the back of the neck 
from very close. The two leading Arrow Cross men returned to us but without the 
men and we still carried on a little while. Suddenly, they told us we should 
turn backwards. Now, I became convinced that the only thing they could aim at 
was destroying us. If they had had another goal in mind we would have continued 
our walk. I cannot say I was scared but rather I felt surprised, and I could not 
imagine that everything would finish. The others were silent, too. They ordered 
us to stay one by one facing the Danube. It occurred only to a fifteen-year-old 
girl next to me, who was together with her mother and aunt, to start crying for 
help in her high childish voice. They started to shoot them one after the other. 
I did not know what to do; I instinctively threw myself on the floor. I do not 
know how this idea came to my mind, now, I cannot account for it; maybe I wanted 
to die like this. The poor woman next to me, who was brought into the hospital 
after a suicide attempt and wanted to die by force, started now crying after the 
first shot that she was still alive. I heard the voice of one of the Arrow Cross 
men as he asked who was shouting, then he shot at her again. I decided not to 
move: either they would shoot me and everything would be over in seconds or I 
would hold out. They checked whether I was still moving and I heard them to 
comment: This is dead already. They did not shoot me not even in a second 
round, while they sent another bullet in my neighbour. There was moonlight, and 
the water carried all sounds well, so I clearly heard and saw everything. I knew 
that they would now drop the corpses into the Danube, and I decided to simulate 
I was dead. I saw with an eye that they began to drag the bodies towards the 
water, and I felt when an Arrow Cross man grabbed my legs and pulled me away. I 
have to note that the bank of Danube is a steep and high wall here; there are no 
stairs at this part. I felt being pulled towards the wall and my upper body fell 
down and he let my legs fall, too. Once again I had luck, because the distance 
got shorter with the length of my body, so I fell less. I felt as I started 
falling and the Arrow Cross man let my legs go but I did not fall into water but 
on a one and a half metres wide solid strip between the wall and water. The only 
thing I cared about was to remain motionless. I fell on my face and did not even 
feel when I was hit, I saw only later that I fell on soft sand. I remained still 
in that position. Water was shallow here, and did not take away immediately the 
corpses of my unfortunate companions. I heard as they said above me: "Water will 
take them away." I heard this comment perfectly clearly, and studied everything 
precisely. Voices got further and further away; they left. I cautiously raised 
my head and looked up, when I heard a voice from behind: "Dont move, because 
they are still here! My companion could see up on the wall. I am not sure how 
much I may have been waiting there: a half an hour or two hours. I calculated 
that they must have been already off, and tried to rise cautiously. I did not 
know what happened to me, whether I was alive and could stand up. I was 
uncertain about my situation and started to touch the parts of my body. I could 
stand up, nothing happened to me, only my nose was a little bit bleeding. It got 
injured when I fell on my face but it was only a minor graze. I looked around 
and tried to orient myself. I felt like dreaming. The woman started to talk 
again: I am the sister of the caretaker and if you remain alive and can call 
for help, call the police or the ambulance. I knew it was in vain, as the 
ambulance did not function in these times. I began screaming as loud as 
possible: "Help, ambulance, police!" I heard nothing but cries from the 
direction of the shot men and the noise of drifting ice. No one was around. I 
desperately realised that crying for help was pointless. In front of me there 
was the icy Danube, I was without a jacket in the cold of January, behind, there 
was a steep wall, and there were no stairs, and corpses lay all around. Russian 
shells were flying from Pest to Buda. I tried to help that poor agonising woman, 
I pulled her a little bit towards the bank, she was awfully heavy, and I did not 
know what to do with her. I tried to find out who the people were whom the 
bandits had shot. I found another breathing woman and I pulled her out, too. I 
started thinking, and understood that I should not stay there but ought to get 
away as soon as possible. Far away I saw a military landing stage with a bridge 
to the bank, and I decided to reach it at any price. I waded into water in the 
overshoes I still had on and tried to reach the bridge. The water was deep and I 
failed. Now, however, the instinct for survival did start working in me and I 
wanted to remain alive at any price. I went back to the end of the sandy strip, 
but not to the corpses but a little bit further away. I sat down on the ground 
and waited. Soon, around 7-8 German soldiers walked down the bridge and jumped 
into a wide military boat and started to row exactly in my direction by chance. 
Their leader noticed me and said: "Da ist jemand". Soon they reached the shore 
in front of me. They must have thought I had fallen off the wall, and their 
leader even asked: "Hat Weh getan?" I promptly understood the situation and 
responded: "Yes." They jumped out, and climbed on the wall, one standing on the 
other. I asked whether they could also help me up. The leader responded 
laughingly: "Denken sie nicht, dass Sie sind ein bischen schwach?" I asked 
whether they could find an ambulance but he answered: "Nein, da sind schon die 
Russen". However, he offered to put me in the boat and bring me to the bank, as 
it was going to be 7 am soon when people could stay in the street. I saw that he 
noticed I was surprised at what he had said since I had no idea that 7 am was 
the time when already civilians could go in the street. They encouraged me that 
I would surely find a policeman even if I would not be able to call the 
ambulance. They lifted me in the boat, covered me with a blanket and landed at 
the military bridge; their leader accompanied me to the bank and put a cover on 
me. In fact, I did not feel bad but I tried to pretend I felt really bad. After 
a few steps, it came to my mind that I should thank them for their favour and 
also wanted to give back the blanket but their leader urged me to take it with 
me. I started off but now I had a great problem: I did not know where to go and 
what to do. First, I thought I would go and see a Christian friend of mine 
living in Buda, but I did not want to make her troubles and anyway my mother 
remained in Weiss Alice Hospital, so I decided to go back to her whatever the 
cost. I had no idea how one could cross the bridge without getting his or her 
identity checked. I walked on the lower quay where I did not meet anyone. 
However, I needed to climb up when I reached the Chain Bridge. There were only 
soldiers walking here, and no one cared about me, I was not at all a curious 
phenomenon, they must have thought I was rushing towards an air raid shelter. I 
found myself in front of a guard of three members on the bridge, and before they 
could have asked anything I asked whether there was a first aid station on the 
Pest bank of the river as I had been injured. By chance I was lucky again 
because a soldier with a more sympathetic face responded that there were no 
first-aid centres on the Pest bank, but he did not think I had any problem with 
my face, it was at the most a little dirty. He suggested I should walk towards 
Erzsébet Bridge, where there was a first-aid centre also on the Buda bank. 
Naturally, I could do nothing else but go that way. On the way, a soldier became 
suspicious of me and stood in my way. When I asked how I could cross Erzsébet 
Bridge, whether it was possible now to cross it, he asked why I wanted to cross 
the bridge and what I was doing there anyway. I said I had visited a friend of 
mine, but he kept on interrogating me and asked where this friend lived. I said 
in Lánchíd Street. Where is Lánchíd Street and where do you live? I said in 
Damjanich Steet, I indicated my old flat and he continued to ask me how I would 
get from Erzsébet Bridge to Damjanich Street. When I explained him the route his 
suspicion disappeared and told me that bridges were still not being bombed, and 
one could cross them. Later, I did not ask anything from anyone but ran through 
the bridge trying to evade Arrow Cross guards. Kossuth Lajos Street looked very 
bad.

Finally, I got into Weiss Alice Hospital!