The person in question has given us the following information:

I went to Auschwitz from the Munk√°cs ghetto. There was no work at all, we did 
not do anything else but line up for roll calls, and suffered constant beatings. 
Four days later, the strong ones were selected and taken by freight cars to 
Neusalz. The journey lasted for a day. First, we threshed out the grain in the 
fields. The work was very hard, and our supervisors, the Aufseherins (German SS 
women), continuously hurried us and beat us with rods at work. We worked 11 
hours a day, and bread (one and a half kilos of it) was distributed a week in 
advance. If we talked on the road, our punishment was to line up for a roll call 
for 4 hours after work. Later, we were assigned factory work. We worked 11 hours 
a day in a flax factory, standing all the time. The SS work supervisors would 
beat us all the time for no reason. We suffered a lot from hunger, because we 
ate the distributed bread in 1-2 days, therefore we did not have any bread for 
the whole week. We worked without coats in large wooden shoes in the harshest 
winter weather.

After this month 900 of us were selected and started out on foot for Bergen-
Belsen. They gave us no food for the journey, we were starving for 3 entire 
days, we were so hungry that we ate grass and snails. Some of us ran into the 
peasant houses to beg for food, but these were shot dead by the SS men. The same 
happened to those who fell behind during the journey, because we were so weak we 
could not walk any longer. Because of these horrible conditions, out of 900 
people only 200 arrived in Bergen-Belsen.

Filth and dirt were horrible in this camp. Everybody was full of lice because we 
were not allowed to have water, so washing ourselves was out of the question. 
Typhus started to spread, killing hundreds of people everyday. We trod over 
corpses, and nobody cared anymore to clear them away. Some of the corpses lay in 
the blocks, most of them outside on the ground often in the greatest snow and 
rain. Our work was to cover the trucks with pine twigs, so that Americans or 
Russians would not recognise that they were German military trucks. If somebody 
moved during the daily roll call German women beat them up. The roll call 
started at 3 am and lasted for hours. Our daily provisions were a quarter of a 
litre of turnip soup and no bread at all. People were so weak they could hardly 
stand on their feet and many starved to death every day. Although there was a 
hospital for sick people, there was no medicine, so the patients died without 
any help.

Under these conditions I got typhus, so I cannot say exactly when and how our 
saviours, the American troops, arrived. When I recovered my senses from a high 
fever I was glad to see that there were no longer Germans around me but our 
saviours. The English doctors took great care of us and gave us all the good 
things, so I recovered soon and got here with the Czech transport.

As for my future plans, I would like to emigrate to Palestine as soon as 
possible.