The persons in question have given us the following information:

We arrived in Auschwitz around the 15th of May. They immediately 
separated us from our parents and our three brothers and sisters, 
who were 13, 11, and 10 years old. Our father got into a transport 
right away but we do not know what happened to him later, while 
our mother with our three younger brothers and sisters were taken 
away. They took us into a disinfecting room where they seized 
everything we had, cut our hair off, gave us new clothes and led 
us into Camp C. They assigned us the work of sorting out clothes 
in the supply warehouse. We did this work for 8 months. Reveille 
was at 3 am, and we stood for hours during the roll call that 
followed. If the number they counted was not right we had to be on 
our knees for hours, often in rain, wind, dirt and mud. Right 
after roll call we went to work and at noon we had to newly report 
for roll call. Our rations were some green soup of grass (pure 
water), one fifth of a loaf of bread, and sometimes a little 
butter, sausage, or cheese. The Lagerälteste was a very decent 
fellow but the Slovak Blockälteste were nasty. If the 
Arbeitsdienstführerin noticed for example that somebody was 
talking she would beat her half-dead. While we stayed there 
selections were continuous. The Rapportführerin  called Grese  
had a rubber baton, and would beat you up if you did not stand 
erect. There was also a Blockführer called Peter, who was very 
wicked to us. 8 months later, the stronger ones were selected and 
we were put into a transport. We travelled for three days. They 
had bathed us again, given us new clothes, and shoes, so we could 
already guess that they were going to assign us to some serious 
work. This was how we arrived into Camp no. 11 in Kaufering. This 
was a brand new camp, an awful camp. Polish people managed it and 
treated us horribly. All winter we carried iron pieces, which was 
very hard work. We had to line up for roll call early in the 
morning, and remained in the workplace all day long. We got coffee 
for breakfast, some soup at noon and one ninth of a loaf of bread 
in the evening. In spite of the ruthlessness of the Poles, 
treatment was still somewhat better than in Auschwitz. Two months 
later, we were selected for another transport and were taken into 
Türkheim. We went to work a distance of 2-3 kilometres to clean 
offices. We worked from morning till evening. We got potatoes to 
eat with a little Zulag, and these provisions were decidedly 
better, only not enough. We did not have to work hard, and were 
treated also well, because we worked for the Wehrmacht, and they 
were very benevolent towards us, felt sorry for us but 
unfortunately could not change our fate. As for the future, we 
plan to emigrate to Palestine or America.