The persons in question have given us the following information:

When we arrived in Auschwitz we were thrown off the train. Women and men had to 
stand in separate groups and the Hauptmannführer sorted out the elderly from the 
young. They took us young people into the baths, where they seized everything we 
had, cut our hair, and after the bath they gave each of us a garment, a slip, 
and a pair of shoes with wooden soles. They led us into Camp A where we right 
away got a little piece of bread and then we got into a block, where 16 people 
lay on a bunk. The 16 of us on the bunk shared 2 covers and a straw mattress. 
Five of us had to eat from the same pot without a spoon. We got no water at all. 
We could not wash either. We stood all day long in the open waiting for roll 
calls and could re-enter the block only in the evening, even if it was pouring 
rain all day long. We did not need to work here at all. 
Once, I went to fetch shoes and saw the crematorium. Human bones were giving off 
smoke in the yard, where there were pits from which flames came out. I could 
hear people squealing and wailing desperately in the crematorium. We asked the 
Slovak girl with whom we were going what was going on. She said your parents 
and brothers and sisters are there; they are being burnt.
One day, selections followed the roll call, which were usually done by Dr 
Mengele and an SS woman. Everyone had to undress completely and walk in front of 
the committee. They sent people either to the right or to the left side - as 
they fancied. The people who were sent to the left side went to the crematorium 
while the rest were assigned work. This was how we were selected once for work. 
Afterwards, each of us got half a loaf of bread, salami, and some inedible 
margarine, and we were entrained. In the freight car we even got coffee. We 
arrived in Hamburg after three days of travel. We were lodged in blocks, 
everyone in a separate bed with two covers, and each of us had overalls, a cup 
and a plate. After arrival we had a day of rest and the following day we left 
for work by ship at 3 am. No matter if it was raining or was cold we could not 
put on anything but the overalls. We were assigned work in a factory where we 
had to clear up the rubble, which was hard work. Later, we shovelled pitch. We 
could do this work only when the sun was shining hot because that was when pitch 
became softer. We worked 10 hours a day. We got lunch in the factory and dinner 
in the camp. Later, there was no lunch only dinner. In the morning we took a 
better ship and the voyage lasted 3-4 hours, and in the evening we departed at 4 
pm and arrived in the camp at around 9 pm. Everyday, after the dinner there was 
a roll call that lasted an hour.
If there was an alarm during work  which was quite frequent  each time we had 
to run around two kilometres to a place that gave us relative protection 
although bombs were already falling on the way. There was an air raid shelter 
also in the factory but we were not allowed to enter it. In the camp, alarms 
were even more horrible because we had to go down into the cellar, which was 
partly under water, and we could stay only in an enclosed area. When bombings 
were regular we could sleep at the most 2-3 hours a night. On the 6th of 
September they moved us into another camp, which was in Vedel, where we 
constructed houses. We walked to our workplace 10 kilometres every day. A week 
later we left also this place and went to Edelstadt, where in the beginning we 
continued to do the same work as in Vedel. Later, we constructed the railway and 
dug trenches. We got very little food but were beaten all the more. Constant 
bombings put our lives in great danger also here. During air raids we were lying 
next to the railroads.
There was a Lagerführer whose mood could determine whether we got food or not. 
Unfortunately, there were days when we got nothing to eat. We had to work in the 
open, in the greatest cold, without gloves. The only thing that was worse was 
that we had no shoes either.
When the front was already close to us they took us to Bergen-Belsen. We had no 
idea where we were heading. () were seized, and German women said we were going 
to go to the crematorium. We were entrained and were given no food for the 
journey, and arrived three days later in Bergen-Belsen. When we arrived we did 
not get food either here. We stopped in the yard, where there were cadavers 
lying around. The alarm went off and they forced us with arms into a block that 
was already overcrowded. Since many were unable to get in they shot in the midst 
of the mess. After two days, they gave us a little turnip cooked in water 
without salt. The following day we were supposed to get bread but luckily a 
general called Bercsényi noticed that the bread was poisoned and did not allow 
it to be distributed. A few days later, the English arrived and liberated us. We 
were all sick, and dead bodies lay in meter high heaps in the yard. 
As for our future plans: we want to go to Palestine as soon as possible.