The persons in question have given us the following information:

(M.I.) Jewish Laws did not influence my economic state; I felt the 
changes only when the Germans came into Hungary. From then on, I 
wore a yellow star on the upper layer of my clothes in the street, 
without that no one could take a step. Later, I lived in a house 
that was marked by a yellow star. On the 23rd of November, the 
Arrow Cross took me away from here. They took me to Vácbottyán to 
dig trenches, where I worked for two weeks. Here they decimated 
us. They made two women stand by a grave and killed them because 
another two women had escaped from the company. Two weeks later we 
departed towards Germany. Until the border we went on foot. It was 
a horrible journey. We were starving, since they gave us nothing 
to eat but kept beating us brutally. At the border they entrained 
us, putting 70 people in a freight car, which they locked 
immediately. We did not get anything to eat or drink. We were in a 
maddening situation.

(W.Sz.) Jewish Laws of 1939 influenced my life inasmuch as they 
seized my boss shop, and since I was dismissed, of course I 
suffered financially. When the Germans invaded the country in 
1944, I wore a yellow star, and then I went to live in a starred 
house, and later during the Szálasi era I was drafted 
on the call of placards and went to the National Centre for High 
School Sports Clubs grounds, from where we started on foot towards 
Szentgyörgypuszta. Here they lodged us in attics and had to dig 
trenches during the day. They gave us very little to eat; and 
maltreatment compensated for lack of food. They seized our 
jewellery, money and souvenirs. When the front got closer to us we 
were resent to Budapest. Crossing Budapest we walked until the 
border of the country in the direction of Pünkösdfürdő. Until 
Hegyeshalom we walked at high speed making 30-40 kilometres a day 
while we got almost no food. We slept in the open on football 
grounds, in market halls, on barges. Having done a journey like 
this we arrived at the border where Germans took charge of us, put 
us on trains, gave us some food and sent us towards an unknown 
future.

(S.M.) Jewish Laws influenced me inasmuch as we started to live 
worse and worse although my father  who was a lawyer  could keep 
his office. Having obtained a certificate of high school education 
I wanted to go to university but I was not accepted because I was 
a Jew. My father became seriously sick. Financially, we lived 
worse and worse, and our life started to be a constant fight for 
survival. After the German invasion we lived in constant terror; 
the Gestapo wanted to take away my father but he was so sick that 
he was left at home. That was when the ghetto was set up. Although 
my father had a serious operation the Arrow Cross chased him out 
of the hospital on the 16th of October, and dragged him with hands 
held high through the streets of Budapest till Tattersall, while 
civilians were shouting and hooraying and enjoying that Jews 
fattened on goose liver were now taken away to be butchered. We 
had to stop in Tisza Kálmán Square with our backs to the wall of 
the Town Theatre and they started shooting. We believed they were 
going to execute us all but they stopped shooting and started 
sorting out men. They chased with the rifle butt my 65-year-old 
father after a serious operation into the temple in Dohány Street, 
while Arrow Cross men were shooting off the opposite house. They 
said if there was another shot they would decimate the group 
standing in front of them. When they finished they chased people 
into the temple of Dohány Street and locked them in. We were let 
free from Tattersall at 3 am. When we arrived home we found our 
flat completely robbed. For two days we did not know where my 
father was when finally he arrived home half dead from the temple 
in Dohány Street. For two days the family stayed together. 
Placards announced that Jewish women had to be drafted, and I also 
had to go. We walked along the highway suffering through the whole 
march; we were mocked, beaten, and cursed, till in Hegyeshalom we 
were handed over to Germans, who put us women into freight cars 
and took us all to Dachau.

(M.I. continues.) We got off in Dachau, that is, fell off the cars 
because of hunger. They took us into the baths where they seized 
our clothes, and made us have a cold shower. They gave us striped 
prisoners clothes and pairs of wooden shoes. We did not do 
anything in Dachau; it was a transfer camp. From here they 
transported us to Ravensbrück.

In Ravensbrück we were lodged in tents where we had a terrible 
life. Rain fell through the roof and we looked miserable in our 
wet clothes in that great cold. We starved a lot, and they beat us 
a lot. Once a factory owner came and selected us and took us to a 
factory to work.

For a day we walked on foot, having altogether 100 grams of bread 
for the journey. We arrived in Spandau, where two weeks later we 
had to start working in a factory suffering from blows and 
strikes. We did very hard work manufacturing bombs. We worked 12 
hours a day in day and night shifts that changed every week.

Much starvation and heavy work caused high mortality: 2-3 people 
died every day. There were also several accidents, for example 
machines killed people, etc. We were exhausted both physically and 
mentally, we could hardly move. We were always terrorised by the 
SS-women who were supervising us, who invented all sorts of 
ruthless games to torture us. I cannot even decide whether we 
suffered more physically or mentally.

The front got closer to us again and upon the pressure of the 
Russians we carried on towards Oranienburg on foot. The road was 
badly made, it was raining, and we were not given food: we did not 
eat anything during the whole trip. SS people hurried us in a 
terrible way and showed no mercy or sympathy at all.

We arrived in Oranienburg, where we spent a day. We were lodged in 
a camp and then they instructed us to proceed but we failed to 
obey. No one took a step not even when they promised to give us 
food. It appears that Germans were already well aware of the 
Russian advance because they did not say a word afterwards. The 
following day, on the 22nd of April, Russians indeed liberated us, 
and from then on we had a good life.

These have been my own experiences.