The person in question has given us the following information:

When in October 1944 the Jews of Budapest had to move into the 
ghetto I obtained Christian documents and went on living outside 
the ghetto. In December, a Christian acquaintance of mine, who had 
become a member of the Arrow Cross, recognised me, and immediately 
fetched a policeman to whom he denounced me because as a Jew I 
remained outside the ghetto. Right away they took me into a 
detention centre, and the following day to Teleki Square, and I 
was travelling towards Bergen-Belsen in a locked freight car 
already the day after.

In Belsen they seized my clothes and gave me striped prisonerÂ’s 
clothes in return. I spent a week in quarantine before I left for 
Ragun.

I worked here for an aircraft plant 12 hours a day. Every second 
week I worked in night shifts, which was much worse than day 
shifts. In the morning, after a night shift, we had to clean the 
block, and could have a rest only when we finished. During the day 
there was of course continuous coming and going, and there was 
lunch later, and roll call, so we hardly slept 2-3 hours a day. 
Women supervisors and foremen would all beat us. Daily rations 
were coffee in the morning, some watery turnip soup at noon and in 
the evening, and 200 grams of bread. Malnutrition and long working 
hours spent standing made my legs swell to double their size so I 
could hardly walk by the end.

At the end of April, they took us to Theresienstadt, where rations 
and treatment were far better. I went to hospital and I was still 
there when we were liberated on the 8th of May.