The person in question has given us the following information:

My husband was called up for labour service in the summer of 1944. Not much 
later he could leave as a privileged officer. He went to the religious community 
and started working for the company collecting clothes. This was the time when 
the opportunity for the Jews emerged that they might do alia. The Swiss Embassy 
was instrumental in this work. When my husband learnt that they were looking for 
a building for this purpose he offered our building at 29 Vadász Street that was 
called the Glass House. Lutz, who was the Swiss consul that time, went to see 
the house with my husband, and then appointed him the administrative head of the 
house. This part of the Embassy received the name "Department of the Swiss 
Embassy in the Interest of Foreigners, Emigration Office" and was in fact a 
member organisation of the Jewish Agency. They appointed administrators, whose 
number continuously increased. Naturally, there was a harsh contest for these 
jobs because of the various benefits they involved and the relative protection 
it gave. This place was a meeting point for the whole Zionist movement of the 
Hungarians, besides for the Slovakian, Polish and Rumanian refugees, who also 
took part in the Zionist movement planning and preparing the partly legal, 
partly illegal emigration of the Jews. The government appeared ready to legalise 
the emigration, and some members of the government started to negotiate with the 
leadership of the office. The preparations were already in a good phase; there 
had been four groups put together, who were meant to leave for Palestine. A lot 
of people wanted to emigrate these days. The collective certificate given by the 
Swiss was ready, the travel was prepared, the plan was well developed. It was 
settled what belongings the emigrants could bring with themselves; but just in 
the last minutes a lacking German permit blocked everything. Me and my husband 
were selected for the first group, we were already fully prepared.

Meanwhile we worked hard on saving people everywhere: those in the internment 
camps, prisoners of the Gestapo, in the headquarters in Csillaghegy or in the 
military jail of the Margit Boulevard.

The government came up with the idea of exempting everyone from deportation who 
had been enlisted into the emigrating groups and had obtained the right for 
emigration. We distributed these certifications in several thousands of copies. 
They had not much of use but we grabbed any opportunity. They succeeded however 
in several places in freeing people. 

Parallel to that, a limited number of illegal emigrants, the participants of the 
so-called "Tijjuls" left the country.

The Lakatos government brought about some relief. People got a bit 
tranquillised. Also our leaders were informed about the possible halt of the 
deportations and the dissolution of the internment camps. This latter did happen 
indeed, as much as Horthy-Liget, Kistarcsa etc. were abolished.

October 15th, the beginning of the Szálasi terror was a bolt from the blue. The 
administrators and officers of the Embassy found asylum in the Vadász Street 
buliding. This protection was soon extended also to the relatives. Later on, it 
became a kind of serpent, that is, not only relatives but also friends, and the 
friends of friends moved into the building.

We agreed with Consul Lutz, that letters of protection  called "Schutzpass" - 
should be distributed. When its text was settled, we started the real work of 
saving people. These letters were distributed in huge numbers. There were 
endless queues in front of the Embassy in order to procure the protection for 
those in labour service digging the trenches. With these letters they could 
leave the service. The number of distributed Schutzpasses is estimated at around 
120,000. Even from the borders a great number of labour servicemen returned.

Vadász Street was nevertheless not only a Schutzpass factory, but provided 
asylum to the administrators and their relatives, to the throng of the escapees 
of the labour service, but also to political fugitives, leading Social 
Democrats, Communists. However, most of all it was a place where the so-called 
"Nöjars" were prepared, the false documents. When at the end the building was 
confiscated they found several hundreds of different seals, seals of the 
Ministry of Defence, of the Arrow Cross etc., they prepared all kinds of 
documents here, release letters, letters of exemption, etc.

At the beginning of the rule of the Arrow Cross there were 2,500 people in the 
building, a great part of them escapees and political fugitives. In these days a 
group of 3 Nazis appeared and lined people up forcing them with their weapons. 
It was my husband to save this thorny situation. He ran down to the flat of the 
janitor where the telephone cabin was and asked for urgent help from the Swiss 
Embassy on Szabadság Square. Vice-consul Steiner appeared immediately. It was 
thanks to his fast action and explanations that the Arrow Cross accepted the 
extraterritorial status of the building and left.

We lived in constant terror as it became very fast obvious that the building did 
not only serve the Embassy but also as a hiding place for throngs of people. 
Several of the great number of people who left the house were caught, and the 
authorities started to be watchful.

Around the 4th of December, a great number of gendarmes attacked the building. 
Three companies of gendarmes occupied the area of the building, while armed 
gendarmes broke into the house and forced everyone to gather in the courtyard. 
My husband saved the situation again. He explained them with great aplomb that 
their attack would draw international conflict and practically threw them out.

The majority of the leaders started to feel in danger and moved to Wekerle 
Sándor Street, where they established a separate department of the Embassy. Here 
they felt in greater security. They asked my husband to go with them but he 
refused to abandon his flock. At the end he remained basically on his own as a 
leader. It was his task to resolve the greatest problems, most of all the 
problem of food supply. To counter possible lack of bread they built an oven and 
tried to substitute bread with scone. Vadász Street provided bread also to 
Wekerle Sándor Street. He made a well-founded calculation that we would have no 
water during the future Russian siege. Water of the well was meant for drinking 
and also for the toilets which were constructed in the court. And people kept 
coming, even if some left, many new appeared all the time. We were afraid that 
the blocks of glass on the attic and in the glass stores would be injured when 
the siege started. In order to provide air-raid shelter also for those who lived 
on the upper floors he rented the neighbouring building of Hungarian Footbal 
Association and managed to obtain extraterritorial status also for this 
building. With the permit of Consul Lutz he constructed a bunker here.

There was a German column of cars in Vadász Street. As this appeared a good 
bombing target we were exposed to continuous danger. Meanwhile reports of people 
who left the building and were identified by the gendarmes kept arriving. The 
saddest was when people who swam out of the Danube with serious wounds asked for 
asylum in the building of the Embassy.

It was a tough battle for those who disappeared. People were saved and brought 
back from the Teleki Square, from the brick factory, from Budaörs, and even some 
from prison on Margit Ring already with a death penalty.

The Embassys activity comprised the organisation of protected houses and the 
supply of protected labour service companies. Masses of people holding 
Schutzpasses petitioned for flats, which were arranged for them by the housing 
office in Szent István park in charge of protected houses. The few 
administrators who left in the morning to check the state of the protected 
houses and returned only in the evening to the Embassy showed great courage. The 
job of the person who guarded and escorted food supplies was not less dangerous.

Also the inhabitants of protected houses lived in constant dread and insecurity. 
Every day we heard of those who ended up at the bank of the Danube or in the 
ghetto and we wanted to help them as much as we could. A minor group of us found 
its ways to the police and also to the heads of the Arrow Cross in the district 
and through sacrifices they managed to get them settle for the status of the 
protected houses, and save their inhabitants from being carried away at least 
for another 8-10 days. The phrase "time is life" was now word by word true.

That list of 7,800 made us anxious a lot. It meant that authorities recognised 
only 7,800 valid Schutzpasses, and the rest would be considered invalid. 
Authorities constantly urged us to submit the list of 7,800 names but the heads 
of the office made great efforts to sabotage this claim. This way they made 
possible to many not to be excluded from the list of the 7,800. Despite all 
threats and hastening this list did never get entirely ready.

The 31st of December, at 3 pm a horde of Arrow Cross with machine-guns broke in 
and forced everyone to get out to the street. It did not regard the people in 
the building of the Football Association who managed to hide. At the gate, with 
the excuse that they were searching for guns they took the wallets and all 
valuables. It seemed we were lost. The Arrow Cross men threw a grenade into the 
cellar and were shooting while we also went through an air raid. This break-in 
led to the death of four people. During the attack my husband sent someone to 
the flat of the district commander of the Arrow Cross, who appeared with his 
friend and gained control of the situation. Meanwhile my husband slipped into 
the telephone cabin and contacted the police headquarters, and the city military 
headquarters. Not much later soldiers came to protect the house. A police unit 
appeared also from the police headquarters with the order that the Jews could 
remain in the building. Our valuables were mostly returned to us.

The next day, on the 1st of January, in the afternoon, some members of the same 
group of Arrow Cross reappeared and wanted to talk to my husband. They wanted to 
confiscate our stored food. In order to protect our supplies that were kept for 
the siege my husband countered them again and refused to empty the store. 
Finally, he agreed to give them a part of the goods following the advice of a 
present officer from the city military headquarters, but they wanted more and 
took my husband away with them to negotiate on this issue. He was reluctant to 
go saying that they could negotiate also on the spot, but at the end he left 
partly because of the machine-gun pressed against his back, but more importantly 
because the above mentioned officer from the city military headquarters Pál 
Fábri gave his word of honour as an officer to bring him back in an hour by car. 
My husband thought he could once and for all get an agreement with the Arrow 
Cross thugs, and secure the life of the inhabitants of the house this way. When 
we later urged Pál Fábri to keep his word of honour he behaved cowardly and 
stupidly. He said we should reckon my husband as a martyr who gave his life for 
2,500 of his companions.

Two days later, the 3rd of January, me and my son left for the office in Wekerle 
Sándor Street, but I kept in touch with those in Vadász Street. No doubt, the 
good political connections that my husband maintained did not exist any more, 
and masses of people of the protected houses started to be put into the ghettos. 
No one kept order in the building of the Embassy, luckily, there were only some 
days left until the liberation.