The person in question has given us the following information:

In December 1944, in the Jewish Hospital of Wesselényi Street we received 
information from a benevolent police officer that in case we find a Christian 
doctor who would venture to go to Teleki Square, he might obtain a permission to 
select the sick from among the Jews kept in captivity there and take them to the 
ghetto hospital. Since Christian doctors did not want to do this dangerous job, 
someone among us had to go there. Naturally, no one walked into the lions den 
with much pleasure. I volunteered to resolve the question. On my licence given 
by the National Health Service, my religion is not noted, so it was not a 
problem, they believed I was a Christian doctor. Dr. Pál Roth-Szappanos (and) 
two delegates from the International Red Cross accompanied me, but they 
immediately disappeared when we arrived at Teleki Square. I reported to the head 
of the guards, who gave the permission to select people according to the 
instructions. It was not at all pleasant to work surrounded by Arrow Cross men. 
I was constantly worried that someone would recognise me, since many people knew 
me in town, and would betray me with a friendly nod or in another way. Thank 
God, I managed to single out 460 people at the first occasion without any 
problem. Naturally, it was not my aim to select the sick. It took all my effort 
to select as many young people as possible and place them in the hospitals of 
the ghetto.

As far as I could judge there were around 5,000-6,000 people kept in the 
buildings of Teleki Square No. 5 and 7  women in the one and men in the other 
one  under awfully overcrowded conditions. Apparently, they did not treat them 
badly but as it was well known these were the places from where they carried 
people to freight cars. I witnessed when they captured a young boy who wanted to 
get away. This unfortunate boy attempted to escape through the roof using a sack 
rolled around his feet and had already left behind the first building of the 
Arrow Cross when a person from a neighbouring building discovered him and had 
the Arrow Cross capture him. They brutally beat him up. Young, 20-year-old Arrow 
Cross thugs played a leading part in the beating.

I repeated this action another four times, saving 300-500 people each time. 
Once, I managed to single out all mothers with children and found them asylum 
with a police escort in one of the Swedish houses. Apart from me, there were Dr. 
Gyula Németh and Dr. László Tauber, who ventured out to Teleki Square  each of 
them once. I had the impression that they would have immediately shot all of us 
if they had found out that we were cheating.

Once, a truck came. Arrow Cross bandits asked who wanted to do some work, and 
put the people who volunteered on the truck and carried them away. Also in this 
case, those who did the selection the most brutally were the 16- and 17-year-old 
thugs.