The person in question has given us the following information:

I spent three weeks in the ghetto. Although the people who used to 
come into the ghetto behaved maliciously in all respects and had 
no humane feelings or goodwill towards us, I cannot think of these 
days with bitterness because I still had my parents and could stay 
with them from the morning till the evening. I was separated 
however from my parents after entrainment and on arrival at 
Auschwitz, and have never seen them later, and I will never again 
feel what parental love and home can mean to you.

I spent four weeks in Auschwitz, and received many beatings but 
starvation was even worse. I was transported to Reichenbach, and 
we worked for the Telefunken plant manufacturing radio lamps 12 
hours a day.

During the entire winter we wore clogs without stockings. SS women 
supervisors could have eased our life a great deal having a little 
compassion for us, but they kept beating us and were happy to see 
us suffer.

When Russian troops Â– our would-be liberators - were approaching 
us we had to leave the camp. We walked for a week. All we got was 
a little bread twice. They would drive on with whips the people 
who could not walk, and if that was of no use or if someone fell, 
they would shoot them. There were great numbers of dead bodies 
when we arrived in Trautenau.

We spent here 5 days and received nothing else but a little daily 
soup. We were completely enfeebled and looked like skeletons when 
they put us on open wagons and we left Trautenau. It was in 
February and we travelled for a week. We were so crammed in that 
we had difficulties to stand but we were terribly cold because 
nothing blocked the wind, and the rain and the snow fell on our 
bodies.

We survived also this and arrived in Porta, where we worked in an 
underground factory. The way to the plant went through a mountain 
and we were starving so much that we could hardly make it. The 
factory was entirely airless; we felt like drowning. We 
manufactured radio lamps.

Four weeks later, we walked to Fallersleben. We dud not even have 
stockings. We spent five days in a destroyed factory building 
before we got on a train again and travelled to Salzwedel. There 
were 120 of us in a freight car; the doors were locked from the 
outside. We had no air at all, and women died one after the other.

On the 14th of April, the Americans liberated us. They were 
infinitely nice and kind to us and gave us everything we needed. I 
have no plans for the future yet.