The person in question has given us the following information:

The ten Jewish families of Tiszasárvár were mainly farmers who 
lived on an average level. My parents were also farmers but had a 
grocery, and a house. We could not complain, as we lived quite 
well.

The Sunday following Easter, they started to move together the 
Jewry into Nagysz?l?s. A week later, we were also moved here. 
Gendarmes appeared to prepare an inventory of our belongings. We 
got packed and they took us in Fancsika, where the Jews of the 
The ten Jewish families of Tiszasárvár were mainly farmers who 
lived on an average level. My parents were also farmers but had a 
grocery, and a house. We could not complain, as we lived quite 
well.

The Sunday following Easter, they started to move together the 
Jewry into Nagysz?l?s. A week later, we were also moved here. 
Gendarmes appeared to prepare an inventory of our belongings. We 
got packed and they took us in Fancsika, where the Jews of the 
neighbourhood were collected. The next morning at 5 am, we left on 
horse-drawn wagons with food for two days and clothing. When we 
arrived in the ghetto of Nagysz?l?s they asked whether there were 
shorthand typists or music teachers among the women, and these 
women had to go out to work first. Also men went out to work. We 
also had a soup kitchen. The ghetto was enclosed and gendarmes and 
Jewish policemen guarded it. There was no complaint against the 
work of the Jewish Council (Berliner, etc.). As far as I know 
there were some attempts to escape but they failed. Once, I was 
standing outside at the wire fence and was waiting for the milk 
for the babies to arrive when a gendarme asked me where I had the 
star. I told him that wearing a star was not obligatory in the 
area of the ghetto, and the gendarme gave me a slap in the face. 
They kept telling us that we were going to stay here only 2-3 
weeks. During this time the Germans plundered our homes, and later 
we returned to the flats.

One day, they told us that we were going to be transferred to the 
region of Bácska to work, and we started to cook and pack for the 
journey without delay. Friday morning at 5 am, they took us into 
the Jewish temple where they thoroughly searched us, seized 
everything we had and left us only some clothing and food. We 
walked to the station that was two kilometres away, and were 
entrained. We got neither water nor a bucket for the toilet. 
First, we received water in Kassa. Until here gendarmes escorted 
us; in Kassa Germans took charge of the train. No one died on the 
way, and I do not know of anyone trying to escape. We still 
believed to be heading towards Bácska to do some work. 

On the 20th of May at 2 pm we arrived in Auschwitz. Polish 
prisoners in striped clothes received us at the station. They told 
us to let our children go with the elderly. When we got off they 
separated men and women. My father remained with two of my younger 
brothers. I got into the baths where they cut our hair off, seized 
our clothes, and gave us striped prisoners clothes in return. We 
were sent into Camp C; 1,200 of us in a block; 14 of us on a 
berth. For two weeks we had no work to do, but later they gave us 
numbers, moved us into another camp, this was Camp B, where we got 
nothing to eat for two days; we got only water. They assigned us 
work: we had to cut wood in the forest. This was quite heavy work. 
We had to work 12 hours a day, while our rations were 200 grams of 
bread, a litre of soup, but no Zulag. Treatment was quite good 
since Wehrmacht soldiers guarded us. We worked here three weeks 
when scarlet fever started to spread, and they transferred us to 
Camp A, where we spent two weeks. They examined us every day 
before we went back to Camp B, from where we went out to dig 
trenches. I worked here for four months before I went to the 
weaving mill, where we worked 12 hours a day again. Our block was 
around 10 metres from a crematorium. We heard from the people of 
Brezsinka that cadavers were burnt there but when we started to 
get curious and made some inquiries, we were told that only rags 
were burnt. When we asked how it was possible that so many people 
arrived but one could not see them afterwards they responded that 
there was a camp for families, and these people were kept there. 
Roll calls were twice a day; often we had to be on our knees for 
hours as punishment.

On the 13th of December, I went to the block for transports where I 
spent two weeks before they took me to Bergen-Belsen. We got a 
loaf of bread, 40 grams of margarine, and sausage for the journey, 
which lasted three and a half days, but we got no water so we 
tried to eat snow to quench our thirst. It was only the day after 
that we arrived when we got some coffee in the morning and later 
also lunch. They assigned me work in the clothes storage, where we 
worked 12 hours a day. I only worked here for 3-4 weeks, and later 
I only had some occasional assignments.
English troops liberated Bergen-Belsen the 15th of April, and later 
they moved us into Celle. Like several thousands of people I also 
got typhus and lay for three weeks in hospital. On the 27th of 
April, we started back with a Czech transport, and arrived home 
via Prague.

Future plans: For the moment I will travel home to look around a 
little, and soon I want to go to Palestine.